Turkey and the United States established diplomatic relations in 1927. Relations after World War II evolved from the Second Cairo Conference in December 1943 and Turkey's entrance into World War II on the side of the Allies in February 1945. Later that year, Turkey became a charter member of the United Nations. Since 1945, both countries have advanced ties under the liberal international order, put forward by the U.S., through a set of global, rule-based, structured relationships based on political and economic liberalism. As a consequence, bilateral relations have advanced under the G20, OECD, Council of Europe, OSCE, WTO, IMF, the World Bank, the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, and NATO.
During the interwar period (1918–1939), Turkey and the United States laid the groundwork for cooperation without a defined strategic interest. The U.S. sent a Congressional delegation to emphasize trade and business, along with non-missionary philanthropy and other cultural enterprises, such as archaeological expeditions sponsored by American universities.
During World War II (1939–1945), oil was set to become increasingly important for American interests. President Roosevelt had a geo-strategic plan in mind at the Anglo-American Petroleum Agreement in 1944. His successor, President Truman stressed the importance of Turkey's geo-strategic location and its "proximity to the great natural resources". In the following decades, as the United States has been engaged in oil wars in the Middle East, Turkey has supported the U.S. in some capacity, directly or indirectly, by giving authorization for the use of the Incirlik Air Base. After World War II, the Mandate for Palestine, which was established within the former Ottoman vilayet of Syria after the dissolution and partition of the Ottoman Empire, was terminated by the result of the Israeli Declaration of Independence on May 14, 1948. The United States recognized Israel on January 31, 1949, and Turkey followed suit on March 28, 1949. Four decades later, Turkey recognized the Palestinian Declaration of Independence on the same day it was announced – November 15, 1988. Even before the Cold War, relations between Turkey and the United States regarding the Middle East were set on a course based on two dimensions: The first dimension was petroleum politics, and the second dimension was the fate of the Palestinians (Palestinian territories and a two-state solution).
During the Cold War (1945–1991), the Turkish Straits crisis of 1945 developed over the request by Joseph Stalin for Soviet military bases in the Turkish Straits as a part of Soviet territorial claims against Turkey, which prompted the United States to declare the Truman Doctrine in 1947. In 1947, the Office of Defense Cooperation Turkey was established as part of the United States Security Assistance Organizations to assist in modernization programs, develop interoperability, promote cooperation, and integrate Turkey into the Western system. As a result of the integration, Turkey became part of the intelligence operations (1960 U-2), and the missile systems (1962 Missile Crisis). At the same time, the geopolitical strategic foreign policy, Containment, caused a response from the Soviet Union in the form of increased communist influence in Turkey. In 1964, President Johnson disclosed the reluctance among Western powers to defend Turkey in what became known as the Johnson letter. The U.S. war on drugs created a backlash when Turkish farm workers employed in poppy production lost their jobs. Anti-Americanism developed among left-wing extremists in Turkey. In 1969, Ambassador Komer's car was set on fire by the Marxist-Leninist Dev-Genç during his visit of Kurdaş at the Middle East Technical University, in which the nascent institution was developed using the aid given by the United States. In the coming years, Turkey became a front for the clashes between far-left and far-right militant groups, as the political violence in Turkey (1976–1980) developed as part of the worldwide incidents of left-wing terrorism aimed at overthrowing the liberal and capitalist governments and replacing them with communist or socialist regimes. One of the organizations involved in the terrorism in Turkey was the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). Throughout its history, the PKK underwent a significant transformation, evolving from an opposition group (anti-imperialist, anti-American) to eventually serving as an intermediary for U.S. regional objectives. Another dimension was developed by Zbigniew Brzezinski, a devout Roman Catholic whose father was posted to the Soviets during persecution of Christians. Brzezinski viewed political Islam primarily through a geopolitical lens and argued for the Green Belt Theory to prevent the spread (e.g. Operation Cyclone) using the plight of Muslims as an ideological attack. President Reagan, in a speech to the National Association of Evangelicals, labeled the Soviet Union an "evil empire" based on suppressing religion and human freedom. In the U.S. State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, early on, Turkey's secular practices were criticized as being counter to the freedom of religion in Turkey. The Islamic preacher Hoca Fethullah Gülen was imprisoned in 1971 for his religious subversivism by the secular Kemalist government. Despite the early pressure, the Gülen movement continued to gain traction, not just locally but internationally, during center-right Presidents Özal (1989 – 1993) and Demirel (1993 – 2000).. Allegations connecting this movement to the CIA were frequent claims, centering on Fethullah Gülen's long-term U.S. residency and geopolitical tensions. Both the PKK, based on separationist idealogy, and the Gülen movement, based on moderate Muslim, continued to be an issue past the Cold War. According to the U.S. State Department, the United States has an interest in keeping Turkey anchored to the Euro-Atlantic community. During and after the Cold War, the U.S. supported the accession of Turkey to the European Union, as Turkey would be aligned with European norms and standards in many domains.
Post Cold War, bilateral relations faced a shifting dynamic: morphed into a complex, uneven partnership defined by strategic cooperation, regional divergence, and deep political friction. In 1996, the U.S. developed a clean break from the Cold War balance of powers in the Middle East, which Jordan and Turkey were to "contain, destabilize, and roll back" the entities that were threats. September 11 attacks pulled the U.S. into the Middle East. Turkey stood aligned with the U.S. through a strategic partnership. Shortly after the attacks, Wesley Clark cited a policy and outlined a plan to "take out seven countries in five years," U.S. regime change wars. Both countries shared goals in combating radical extremist networks, counterterrorism,  and managing security dynamics in the Middle East during the war on terror. 
Over the 2010s, Turkey has evolved into a much more independent geopolitical player, but at the same time, the country became less predictable. As the instability in the region increased, Turkey was also no longer an "island of stability" for the United States, but a source of new, often unexpected impulses on a regional scale. The 2010s relations looked like a soliloquy that began with the Turkey migrant crisis as high numbers of refugees were arriving in Turkey mainly from the Syrian theater. Turkey and the US relations were also involved in the Iran Nuclear issues in the early 2010s. Turkey was there when Libya turned into a failed state. It is fair to say that in these conflicts, Turkey and the US did not see eye to eye. The failed coup d'état of 2016 was a major point in the relations; some strong words were  exchanged between allies. Turkey decoded ByLock, and quickly investigated the social structure. In less than a year, Turkey began purges in the state apparatus. 87 army generals, 32 admirals, and 30 air force generals were sacked from TAF. The following step: the TAF moved into the Syrian theater facing America's allies. An unexpected outcome of the failed coup d'état was related to several rebel F-16s targeting the presidential jet and bombing the parliament, in which the NATO  IFF system was a factor in any form of resistance to these agents. At the time, the modernization of the Turkish air defense system was an ongoing debate in which the U.S. didn't want to comply with Turkey's conditions; in 2017 the decision was made. Following the delivery of the first S-400 missile system from Russia, Turkey was excluded from the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program on July 17, 2019, and on December 14, 2020, the U.S. government decided to apply sanctions, a NATO member, for violating the CAATSA law of 2017 by purchasing the S-400 missile system from Rosoboronexport. 
Over the 2020s, the deterioration of bilateral relations of the 2010s was not limited to the military, as evident in the dispute over the Armenian genocide, which the U.S. formally recognized in 2021 during Biden's administration. There was a short normalization in Israel-Turkey relations with the help of the U.S., Erdogan-Netanyahu shaking hands. However, the goodwill deteriorated between the two leaders very quickly due to developments regarding the Palestinians. Erdogan called a U.S. ally "Hitler," and Netanyahu responded in kind  while Blinken performed multiple trips to the region facing a cold reception.. 
According to the U.S. Department of State, Turkey has been a key partner for U.S. policy in the surrounding region. Turkey has partnered with the U.S. for security in Afghanistan (ISAF), and serves as NATO's vital eastern and southern anchor, controlling (per the Montreux Convention of 1936) the Turkish Straits, i.e. the Bosporus and the Dardanelles. Turkey has contributed and continues to contribute to international security alongside U.S. forces in Europe (e.g. in Bosnia, IFOR, KFOR, Baltic Air Policing, etc.), and the seas bordering the Horn of Africa. Turkey borders Georgia (Russo-Georgian War), Azerbaijan (Nagorno-Karabakh conflict), Iraq (Iraqi conflict), Syria (Syrian civil war) and Iran (hostile to the United States since the revolution in 1979). Conflicts in the aforementioned countries have affected the relations between Turkey and the United States.


== Background ==

After 1780, the United States began relations with North African countries and the Ottoman Empire. In the early 1800s, the US fought the Barbary Wars against the Barbary states, which were under Ottoman suzerainty. The Ottomans severed diplomatic relations with the United States on April 20, 1917, after the United States declared war against Germany on April 4, 1917, due to the Ottoman–German alliance. Normal diplomatic relations were re-established with the Ottoman Empire's successor state, Turkey, in 1927.
The strategic partnership characterized the exceptionally close economic and military relations during the Cold War and the War on Terror.


=== Strategic partnership during Cold War ===
From 1952 to 1991, the relationship was premised on a "mutuality of benefits".

After participating with United Nations forces in the Korean War, Turkey joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1952. The second-largest army belongs to Turkey in NATO and host of the Allied Land Command headquarters including the Incirlik (1955–present) and Konya Airbases (2000–present).
Turkey was one of the founding members of the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO), which promoted shared political and military economic goals similar to and modeled after NATO. The US pressured and promised military and economic aid to be a founding member. The US was not a member. The defensive organization never became functional partly due to the lack of leadership, as John Foster Dulles (United States Secretary of State) claimed that the administration could not obtain Congressional approval."
The U.S. actively supported Turkey's membership bid to join the European Union. It frequently lobbied on behalf of Ankara through its diplomatic missions in EU capital cities.


=== Strategic partnership during War on Terror ===
In 2001, the relationship began with the premise that the United States would foster cooperation on counterterrorism, law enforcement, and military training and education. Turkey remained a close ally of the United States and provided support in the war on terror.

After the September 11 attacks, President George W. Bush coined the phrase "They hate our way of life (to disrupt and end a way of life)." Clash of Civilizations was the source and Moderate Muslim was the solution. The US and American foreign policy groups looked for "moderate Muslims" to counter violent extremism, promote democratic values, and build alliances in the Islamic world. RAND Corporation suggested funding and supporting secular, liberal, and Sufi Muslim networks to spread pluralistic ideas. In 2005, PM Erdoğan sponsored the Alliance of Civilizations (AOC) initiative. AOC was proposed at the 59th General Assembly of the United Nations by the Spanish Prime Minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero. Also, Fethullah Gulen and his liberal "Turkish Islam" movement were presented as moderate Islamists.  It was claimed that Gulen's movement seems to have no aspiration to establish political power. The Turkish model was debated during Obama presidency. Turkey's experience with secularism as envisioned under Atatürk's reforms created a bridge between the Islamic world and the West (Judeo-Christian). However, these concepts, Islam-Christianity-Judaism, are complex and subject to shifting political realities. 
In 2013, the US and Turkey created a $200 million fund to help stem extremism by undercutting the ideological and recruiting appeal of jihadists in places like Somalia, Yemen, and Pakistan. The program was based on the role of education in preventing violent extremism and deradicalizing young people. The aim was to develop countering values to prevent violent extremism. It was the first global effort to support local, community-level initiatives aimed at strengthening democratic values and empathy towards the enemies. When asked, John Kerry defined the strategic goal: "It's a different kind of challenge, and we believe we need to intensify our efforts to address the underlying factors that lead down the path of violence. It's about building foundational security, challenging the narrative of violence to refuse to justify the slaughtering of people."


=== Deterioration of the partnership ===

US Congressional Research Service (CRS) stated that "Turkey's relative importance for U.S. policymakers declined in the immediate aftermath of the Gulf War and the collapse of the Soviet Union, but focus remained on a number of regional developments involving Turkey." According to CRS, a "reassessment period" was established between 1991 and 2002. CRS timeline for 1991–2002 showed that the US established a "No-Fly Zone" in the north of Iraq, and later withheld military loans to Turkey on alleged human rights violations in relation to the PKK in 1994. In 1997, the US designated the PKK as a foreign terrorist organization, and the PKK's activities stopped following its leader's capture with US assistance in 1999. In 2003, the Turkish parliament did not allow the US invasion of Iraq from Turkey, and the following year the PKK resumed insurgency and attacks from northern Iraq.

Since US President Barack Obama mediated tensions between Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, May 31, 2010, over the Gaza flotilla raid, some neoconservatives have called for Turkey's expulsion from NATO. Tom Rogan from National Review promoted expelling Turkey from NATO as part of his broader efforts to reform the alliance. Ted Galen Carpenter, a senior fellow in defense and foreign policy studies at the Cato Institute, also proposed expelling Turkey from the Western alliance. A breakpoint risen in 2015. While claiming Turkey turned a blind eye to ISIL and other jihadist networks on both sides of its border, US began openly arming the People's Protection Units (a militia related to Kurdistan Workers' Party). However the US-led Operation Inherent Resolve against ISIL was on June 15, 2014, five months before Turkey performed the January 2014 Turkish airstrike in Syria. Another breakpoint had risen in 2016. Caused by the belief among most Turkish citizens that America had a hand in the 2016 Turkish coup d'état attempt. It was compounded by the fact that its suspected ringleader, the Islamic preacher Hoca Fethullah Gülen, lives in Saylorsburg, Pennsylvania. Shortly after the FETÖ's (the Gülen movement) purges and arrests (2016–present purges in Turkey), on October 4, 2016, Turkey moved to arrest Turkish nationals employed at American consulates (Metin Topuz on espionage and conspiracy charges), followed on the October 7, 2016, arrest of pastor and teaching elder Evangelical Presbyterian Andrew Brunson. On October 10, 2016, in regards to John R. Bass, Turkey declared: "We do not consider the ambassador a representative of the United States" which was a step short of being an unwanted person. The response came on May 16, 2017 John McCain and Claire McCaskill called for the expulsion (unwanted person) of the Turkish ambassador Serdar Kılıç, following the 2017 clashes at the Turkish Ambassador's Residence in Washington, D.C.

According to The Economist, Turkish-American relations sank to their lowest in over 40 years in October 2017. Turkey moved to establish safe zone (Syria). Turkey performed the Operation Olive Branch (March 25, 2018 – August 9, 2019) against the YPG. Turkey established the Northern Syria Buffer Zone. On August 10, 2018, Trump tweeted that he would double tariffs (first Trump tariffs) on Turkish steel and aluminum using the "Section 232," which was imposed on countries whose exports threaten to impair national security. With both internal structural weaknesses and US sanctions, the Economy of Turkey fell into the Turkish economic crisis (2018–current). From October 9 to 17, 2019, the Operation Peace Spring established the Second Northern Syria Buffer Zone. US lost trust in Turkey as the latter bombed its own military base at the Northern Syria Buffer Zone. On February 5, 2020, the US halted a secretive military intelligence cooperation program with Turkey against the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), which was listed as a terrorist organization by the US and Turkey. Turkey had observation posts in the Idlib demilitarization (2018–2019) zone which held more than 3,000,000 internally displaced Syrians (more than half of them children). On February 27, 2020, Syrian forces attacked Turkish forces at the Idlib demilitarization (2018–2019) zone, and military separation between the forces became public after a senior US State Department official argued with the Pentagon over Turkey's request for two Patriot batteries on its southern border. The request was confirmed by Turkish Defense Minister Hulusi Akar.
On October 12, 2023, President Biden declared "particularly the actions by the Government of Turkey to conduct a military offensive into northeast Syria, undermines the campaign to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, endangers civilians, and further threatens to undermine the peace, security, and stability in the region". Following this declaration President Biden reestablished Executive Order 13894 which stated Turkey is an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States constituted by the situation in and in relation to Syria. Following the 2023 Ankara bombing on October 1, 2023, Turkish intelligence officials established that the assailants arrived from Syria, where they had been trained, by paragliders. Six days before the declaration, on October 5, Turkey began bombing their facilities in Syria. CJTF–OIR downed a Turkish drone, while doing airstrikes on PKK militants around Hassakeh, which came within 500 m of American troops. A day before the executive order was made public, on October 11, Turkey declared to intensify strikes on the PKK in Iraq and Syria.


=== Single to Multi-Polar International System ===
The 2010s were a period of deterioration, specifically over the US policies regarding the separatist Kurdish militia (PKK, YPG, etc). According to the Council on Foreign Relations, the United States needs to adjust its expectations, ask for less, and develop other options, because despite being a NATO ally, Turkey's interests do not completely align with those of the United States on all regional or global issues. 

It is evident that the Turks do not want to be sidelined by the US or the West when it comes to their own national security concerns. Neither do they want to be hamstrung by easily severed logistics. Clearly, they want to be, and have been thinking about becoming, important players in regional politics, and their public national security policy says as much. They have become involved at every opportunity in multi-national military interventions. They have shown a willingness to defy the US. They have industrial and procurement plans aimed at strategic autonomy.
In 2018, the Council on Foreign Relations recommended that "the U.S. needs to develop alternatives to Incirlik Air Base. The use of the base to advance U.S. interests is no longer assured."  Increase US-Greece cooperation Trump administration. In 2019, the United States and Greece signed the "Revised Defense Cooperation Agreement". The agreement was described as critical to responding to new security challenges in the eastern Mediterranean Sea. In 2021, the "Greek-American Mutual Defense Cooperation Agreement" permitted the U.S. military to use more bases. In a couple of short years, Turkey saw shifting NATO powers to its western neighbor. Anadolu Agency reported growing US military presence in Greece can lead to undesired scenarios in the Aegean ‘Deploying more US troops to Greece would disrupt NATO's powers,’  In 2020, Turkey was added to CAATSA, and the partnership worsened from ambivalent allies of the 2010s to antagonists. In 2021, President Biden formally recognized the Armenian genocide, while emphasizing U.S. relations with Armenia. After Azerbaijani forces blocked the Zangezur corridor in 2023, American Enterprise Institute scholar Michael Rubin called Biden to act, and to start talks with Armenia to establish a military base in the Zangezur corridor. On September 11, 2023, a small contingent of U.S. special forces trained with Armenian soldiers during the "Eagle Partner" exercise in Armenia. As of 2025, Armenia still hosts the Russian 102nd Military Base in Gyumri and the Russian 3624th Airbase in Erebuni Airport near Yerevan, and still uses Soviet or Russian-made military equipment.


== History ==


=== Truman administration (1945–1953) ===
One of Turkey's most important international relationships has been with the United States since the end of the Second World War and the beginning of the Cold War. 


==== Soviet Union (Straits crisis, Truman Doctrine, Korean War, NATO) ====

In 1945, the Turkish Straits crisis developed over the request for Russian military bases in the Turkish Straits as part of Soviet territorial claims against Turkey. After World War II, the Soviet government pressured Turkey to allow Russian shipping to pass freely through the Turkish Straits. Tensions in the region led to a show of naval force by the Soviets after Turkey refused to comply with the Soviet Union's requests.
In 1946, President Truman returned the body of Münir Ertegün, former Turkish Ambassador to Washington (2nd Ambassador of Turkey to the United States), back to Istanbul with the battleship Missouri. Missouri, with her 1,515 officers and enlisted men, honored the deceased between March 21, 1946, in Washington, and April 5, in Istanbul, until his body was given to his family. It was a gesture not only to Turkish foreign service but also to demonstrate that the US was defending Turkey against Soviet threats.

In 1947, British assistance to Turkey ended. The U.S. dispatched military aid to ensure that Turkey would retain chief control of the passage. Turkey began to associate with the United States in 1947 when the United States Congress designated Turkey, under the provisions of the "Truman Doctrine", as the recipient of special economic and military assistance intended to help it resist threats from the Soviet Union.
The Truman Doctrine was an American foreign policy that sought to counter Soviet geopolitical expansion during the Cold War. The Truman Doctrine used adherence to democracy in its strategic goals. Truman used the advancement of liberal Democracy to secure congressional aid for Turkey. Truman's strategic imperatives and democratic rhetoric against communist ideology held that, because of US assistance against the Soviets, Turkey moved away from a single-party system towards a multi-party system. There is no causal link between Turkey's democratization and either the Truman Doctrine or Turkey's admission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). In Atatürk's Reforms, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk envisioned a multi-party-based system. However, Turkey was a " de facto single-party state" (the correct term is one-party period of the Republic of Turkey) as the Republican People's Party effectively prevented the opposition from winning the elections. Turkey held the first multi-party elections in 1946. Multi-party period of the Republic of Turkey  began with the Democratic Party government of Adnan Menderes.
The U.S. sought the containment strategy at the beginning of the Korean War to defend Republic of Korea (ROK) from a communist invasion by Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK).  In support of the US' overall Cold War strategy, Turkey contributed to the United Nations forces in the Korean War (1950–53). On October 19, 1950, with more than 4,500 troops Turkish Brigade was attached to the U.S. 25th Infantry Division. The Turkish Brigade was the only foreign unit of its size permanently attached to a U.S. division (Brothers in Arms). Turkey replaced/replenished this Brigade each year (15,000 combat soldiers and a total of 21,212) until mid-summer of 1954. A mutual interest in containing Soviet expansion provided the foundation of US–Turkish relations for the next four decades.

After extensive study and debate on extending the alliance to the eastern Mediterranean, the admission of Greece and Turkey to NATO on February 18, 1952, was finalized. The membership of these two countries created NATO's new southern flank. Changes were needed to the treaty's wording to expand its territorial reach. Turkey's admission to NATO gave NATO a much longer land border with the Warsaw Pact. The 1936 Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits gave Turkey control over the Turkish Straits, through which the Soviet Navy's Black Sea Fleet had access to the Mediterranean. At the same time, Turkey brought to the alliance its second-largest body of military workforce after that of the United States, in addition to access to sites for forward deployment and intelligence gathering.


==== Marshall Plan (economic recovery & industrial modernization) ====

Since Atatürk's Reforms, Turkey has wanted to be part of the Western alliance. Turkey also intended to enter into the Western economic structure. The Truman Doctrine aimed to prevent the spread of communism in Turkey. It aimed to change Turkey's isolated economy (statist structure) to move into a liberal system. Marshall subsidies created economic added value in Turkey. The Marshal Plan also directed Turkey toward higher military spending (the second-largest military in NATO) because it was seen mainly as a buffer state against the Soviet Union and the Middle East.
Turkey received $111 million in economic and military aid, and the U.S. sent the aircraft carrier Franklin D. Roosevelt.  The Marshall Plan intended to direct Turkey towards developments in the agriculture, mining, and tourism sectors. 
Tractors and other agricultural equipment entered the country, sparking a production boom.
The aid to the Turkish military went back to the US military-industrial complex. .


=== Eisenhower administration (1953–1961) ===


==== Soviet Union (NATO, CENTO, U-2 incident) ====
Turkey was a founding member of the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO) collective defense pact established in 1955, and endorsed the principles of the 1957 Eisenhower Doctrine. In the 1950s and 1960s, Turkey generally cooperated with other United States allies in the Middle East (Iran, Israel, and Jordan) to contain the influence of countries (Egypt, Iraq, and Syria) regarded as Soviet clients. Throughout the Cold War, Turkey was the bulwark of NATO's southeastern flank and directly bordered Warsaw Pact countries.
1960 U-2 incident was a U-2 spy plane shot down by the Soviet Air Defence Forces while performing photographic aerial reconnaissance deep into Soviet territory. On April 28, 1960, a U.S. Lockheed U-2C spy plane, Article 358, was ferried from Incirlik Air Base in Turkey to the US base at Peshawar airport by pilot Glen Dunaway. Fuel for the aircraft had been ferried to Peshawar the previous day in a US Air Force C-124 transport. A US Air Force C-130 followed, which carried the ground crew, mission pilot Francis Powers, and backup pilot Bob Ericson. On the morning of April 29, the crew in Badaber was informed that the mission had been delayed by one day. As a result, Bob Ericson flew Article 358 back to Incirlik, and John Shinn ferried another U-2C, Article 360, from Incirlik to Peshawar. On April 30, the mission was delayed one more day because of bad weather over the Soviet Union. On May 1, Captain Powers left the base in Peshawar on a mission with the operations code word GRAND SLAM. Four days after Powers' disappearance, NA