Since 2 March 2026, there has been an ongoing war in Lebanon between Israel and the militant group Hezbollah, with Israel invading parts of Lebanon. It is a resumption of major fighting in the Hezbollah–Israel conflict, and part of the wider conflict in the Middle East. The war has precipitated a humanitarian crisis, resulted in the deaths of more than 4,000 people from Israeli strikes in Lebanon, and seen the forced displacement of over 1 million.
Hezbollah's response to the Gaza war led to the 2024 Israeli invasion of Lebanon. After an Israel-Lebanon ceasefire agreement in November 2024, Israel still conducted airstrikes, saying that Hezbollah breached ceasefire conditions. Hezbollah launched strikes on Israel on 2 March 2026, in response to Israel and the United States launching a war against Iran, Hezbollah's main backer, and assassinating its supreme leader. Israel resumed airstrikes across Lebanon on a larger scale and, on March 16, began ground operations in southern Lebanon. The main bridges on the Litani River were blown up by Israel to cut off the south from the rest of Lebanon; Bint Jbeil became a site of intense ground combat. Israel announced it would demolish Lebanese border villages and occupy Lebanon up to the Litani. Lebanon moved to ban Hezbollah's military activities; it also condemned Israeli attacks on Lebanese civilians. Iran called for an end to Israeli attacks in Lebanon as a condition for a ceasefire in the wider war.
After a ceasefire halted the Iran war, Hezbollah halted its attacks. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said the ceasefire did not apply to Lebanon, contradicting Iran and the Pakistani mediator, and launched the largest airstrikes of the war. On 16 April, Israel and Lebanon agreed to a 10-day ceasefire, later extended more than once. On 3 June, Israel and Lebanon reached an agreement, facilitated by the US. On June 4, Hezbollah rejected the Lebanon-Israel deal and demanded a full ceasefire and a full Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon. Speaker of Lebanese Parliament Nabih Berri suggested that Hezbollah and Israel both withdraw from south of Litani. 
On 15 June, the Islamabad Memorandum was agreed between the US and Iran, including a ceasefire in Lebanon. Israeli forces remained in occupied areas of Lebanon. On 19 June, U.S. President Donald Trump announced an Israel-Hezbollah truce entering into force at 4 p.m. local time. On 26 June, US secretary of state Marco Rubio announced a framework deal between Israel and Lebanon for "lasting peace and security". The agreement includes full disarmament of Hezbollah; it was rejected by Hezbollah. On 30 June, Iran announced that it, along with the US and Lebanon, has reached an agreement to establish a committee to oversee the conclusion of the war. On 15 July, the US State Department reported that Israel has agreed to withdraw from pilot zones in southern Lebanon. On 20 July, the US announced that Israel handed over sections of the buffer zone occupied by it in southern Lebanon to the Lebanese government as per its U.S.-mediated deal with Beirut. Lebanon's army began deploying in Zawtar al-Gharbiyeh on July 21, after an Israeli withdrawal in line with the agreement.


== Background ==

In the aftermath of the outbreak of the Gaza war in October 2023, Israel and the Lebanese Shia militia Hezbollah have been engaged in conflict, as part of a longer stretch of hostilities between the two since the latter's founding in 1982. Hezbollah launched strikes against Israel after the 7 October 2023 attacks, which it said was in solidarity with the Palestinians. After a year of fighting, Israel invaded southern Lebanon in October 2024, pulling out after the US brokered an agreement between Israel and Lebanon at the end of November, but not before killing Hezbollah's militant leader, cleric Hassan Nasrallah. Between November 2024 and March 2026, however, several ceasefire violations occurred between the two, with Israel launching near-daily attacks killing 331 people (of which at least 127 were civilians) by November 2025; later, the total death toll reached 500; Israel said these actions were an attempt to enforce the ceasefire terms and prevent Hezbollah's renewed military buildup. Hezbollah violated the ceasefire terms by rebuilding its militant infrastructure and weapons arsenal.
UNIFIL, a UN peacekeeping mission present in southern Lebanon for decades, was terminated in September 2025 by the UN Security Council (amid pressure from Israel and the US, a permanent member of the council); its mandate ends on 31 December 2026 and it is expected to disappear from Lebanon in 2027 at the latest.
Following the US–Israeli joint strikes on Iran on 28 February 2026, Hezbollah condemned the attacks, stating "we are confident that the American and Israeli enemy will receive a great slap and will reap nothing but failure from its tyrannical, criminal aggression." On 1 Match, after Iran confirmed the death of Ali Khamenei in the US–Israeli strikes, Hezbollah's secretary-general Naim Qassem vowed to retaliate and "undertake our duty of confronting the aggression", stating Hezbollah would not leave "the field of honor and resistance." Hezbollah later claimed that the attack was a "defensive act" after over a year of Israeli attacks despite a truce. It added that it restarted fighting to force Israel to stop its aggression and evacuate from seized Lebanese territories, emphasizing that the move was unrelated to the Iran war.


== Main events ==


=== First week (2–8 March) ===
On 2 March, Hezbollah launched several projectiles into northern Israel, the first time it had done so since the 2024 ceasefire, targeting a missile defense site south of Haifa. Hezbollah said it restarted fighting to force Israel to stop its aggression and evacuate from seized Lebanese territories, emphasising that the move was unrelated to the Iran war. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said it had intercepted one projectile originating from Lebanon, letting several others fall into open sites. In response, Israeli jets struck targets in the Lebanese capital of Beirut at 3am local time, issuing evacuation orders to local civilians in 50 villages across Southern Lebanon and the Beqaa Valley. The Israeli military said it carried out "precise and targeted" strikes against "senior terrorist elements of the Hezbollah terrorist organization in the Beirut area" and "a central terrorist element of the Hezbollah terrorist organization in southern Lebanon." Early reports suggested the intended targets were Naim Qassem and Mohammad Raad. Later, Saudi news channel Al Hadath reported Raad's whereabouts were unknown and stated his body was being searched for in the rubble. The IDF said Hezbollah's intelligence chief, Hussain Makled, was killed in the strikes. Adham Adnan al-Othman, senior commander of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Lebanon, was also killed in an airstrike in Beirut's southern suburbs.
On 3 March, Hezbollah fired missiles and drones targeting three Israeli bases, Ramat David Airbase, the Meron monitoring base and Camp Yitzhak. Israel carried out airstrikes on Hezbollah strongholds and also targeted Al-Manar TV's headquarters in Beirut. Later on in the day, Israeli forces were ordered to seize positions within Lebanon. Israel said its military had seized "strategic areas" in southern Lebanon while ordering nearby Lebanese towns to evacuate. Israel struck Yohmor with white phosphorus, illegal under international law, causing several homes to catch fire.
On 4 March, Hezbollah launched drone and missiles into Israel, attempting to hit military bases and oil and gas infrastructures. Hezbollah anti-tank fire caused moderate injuries to two Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon, making them the first Israeli injuries of the conflict. Israel launched strikes targeting the communications centres of Hezbollah, during which al-Manar TV station and al-Nour radio station were struck. More strikes were focused on villages in southern Lebanon used by Hezbollah. Following Hezbollah's continued attacks, Israel issued an immediate urgent evacuation warning to South Lebanon residents, telling them to move north of the Litani River. UN peacekeeping force reported Israeli soldiers entered several towns and villages in Southern Lebanon, including Kfar Kila, Houla, Kfar Shouba, Yaroun and Khiam.
Israel carried out an incursion into southern Syria on 4 March, shelling the area between Jamla and Saisoun in Daraa Governorate, and arrested four civilians. Israel accused Syria of deploying combat units to the Syrian Golan Heights, stating it will not allow the Hezbollah–Israel strikes to be used as a pretext to "harm the Druze" in southern Syria and demanded the Syrian government prevent Iraqi militias from crossing Syrian territory towards the Golan Heights.
UNIFIL published on 5 March that since 2 March it monitored over 210 missiles fired by Hezbollah into Israel. Israel killed a Hamas official in a strike in Beirut, as well as several strikes early in the day, including two in the Hezbollah stronghold of south Beirut. More attacks continued, targeting Hezbollah facilities and operatives, as it renewed its evacuation warning to residence in Southern Lebanon, close to sites it will target. At midday, the IDF published an immediate evacuation notice to the southern suburbs of Beirut, specifically Bourj el-Barajneh, Hadath, Haret Hreik and Chiyah. Residents were advised by the IDF to move north and east.
After Israel ordered inhabitants of the entire portion of Lebanon that is south of the Litani River to evacuate (along with some other areas), Hezbollah issued its own orders to civilians in a five-kilometer-wide strip of Israeli territory bordering Lebanon to evacuate. This message was published by Hezbollah in Hebrew, along with maps of the zone to be evacuated. Israeli sources described Hezbollah's self-described evacuation orders as psychological warfare; Israel said it is not evacuating the area. Hezbollah repeated the supposed evacuation order in the following days and weeks.
Hezbollah conducted a series of attacks on Israel and Israeli forces on 6 March, launching rockets and artillery shells toward the Golan Heights and Haifa. During the night and morning after issuing advance warnings to minimize civilian casualties, Israel launched a series of airstrikes targeting Hezbollah headquarters located in ten high-rise buildings in Beirut. The strikes also targeted warehouses where drones used in attacks against Israel were reportedly stored. A Hezbollah projectile fired near the Lebanese border injured eight Israeli soldiers, five severely. Among the injured was the son of far-right finance minister Bezalel Smotrich. Two Israeli missile strikes hit a UNIFIL battalion headquarters in al-Qaouzah in Bint Jbeil, injuring four UN peacekeepers from Ghana.
On 7 March, Hezbollah continued firing missiles and rockets into northern Israel; no deaths were reported. Israel's retaliation included attacks in the eastern Lebanese town of Nabi Chit, were reports say an operation to search for Ron Arad took place. The Lebanese health ministry reported that Israeli military killed over 41 people there, and injured 40 more. The deaths include at least three soldiers of the Lebanese Armed Forces and one from Lebanon's General Security Directorate. Later that day an evacuation notice was issued by the IDF to Zqouq El Mufdi, Tyre. These evacuation notices were followed by "Save your lives" notices and reminders to residents to stay away from their homes.
Israel launched an airstrike on the Ramada hotel building in central Beirut on 8 March, killing four key Iranian commanders of the IRGC's elite Quds Force, who were planning terror attacks on Israel. Later the Israeli army stated they killed five senior commanders from the Lebanon Corps of the Quds Force of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps in a precise strike in Beirut. Netanyahu said: "Whoever lays down their arms will save their life, and whoever doesn't, their blood will be spilled." A Hezbollah rocket attack in southern Lebanon damaged a Puma armored engineering vehicle and then hit a Caterpillar D9 bulldozer attempting to assist the vehicle, killing two soldiers.
Constantinos Kombos, Cyprus's Foreign Minister, stated the explosive-packed drones launched from Lebanon towards the island, were launched by Hezbollah, targeting British bases there.


==== Airstrike on Ghazali family home (5 March) ====

On the evening of 5 March 2026, four members of the Ghazali family were killed by an Israeli airstrike on their home in Mashghara, southern Lebanon. The attack on the family home occurred while they were gathered for Iftar, the meal that breaks the fast at the end of the day in Ramadan. The men's maternal uncle, Fouad Qasem, who lived nearby, helped recover the bodies. He told NPR, "I held my own flesh and blood in my hands... What did the children do to deserve this?"
On 8 March, a memorial service was held for the family in Dearborn Heights, Michigan, where other family members lived. The service was attended by hundreds of people.
One of the family members in Michigan was United States citizen Ayman Ghazali, the men's brother and the children's uncle. On 12 March, Ayman Ghazali attacked the Temple Israel synagogue. Ayman's suicide was the only death in the attack, but a security guard was injured and responding police officers were treated for smoke inhalation.
On 15 March, the IDF claimed responsibility for the attack in Lebanon, alleging that Ibrahim Ghazali (the children's father) was a Hezbollah commander and describing Ibrahim as "eliminated", the term the IDF uses for assassinations. The IDF's Arabic language spokesperson Avichai Adraee further alleged that Ibrahim Ghazali was in Hezbollah's anti-tank missile unit. In response to the statements by Israel, a Hezbollah spokesperson said that none of the family members were affiliated with Hezbollah.


=== Second week (9–15 March) ===

A double strike on a house in Al-Qlayaa killed Lebanese Maronite Catholic priest Father Pierre al-Rahi. According to Hezbollah, on 9 March the organization fought Israeli forces that landed once again in eastern Lebanon near Nabi Sheet. This time they were 15 Israeli helicopters that came from the Syrian side of the border. Hezbollah kept firing rocket and missiles in to Israel. During the day Israel targeted strikes on the Al-Qard Al-Hasan Association, an US-sanctioned institution known for funding Hezbollah. Before mid night, the Syrian Army informed Hezbollah shelled their positions. The Syrian Army declared they detected Hezbollah's reinforcements at the Syrian-Lebanese border.
The Syrian Army said they would coordinate a possible Syrian response to Hezbollah's actions with the Lebanese government side. On the same day, Syria reported early in the morning that artillery shells fired from Lebanon landed near a town 20 miles west of Damascus. Syria accused Hezbollah of targeting Syrian army positions in the area and said that it had observed Hezbollah reinforcements arriving along the Lebanon–Syria border, warning that it would respond to any attack on its territory.
Hezbollah claimed it targeted sites in Tell al-Hamames, south of the city of Khiam. According to reports Hezbollah and Iran fired missiles on northern Israel. It was reported that residents from Aalma El Chaeb in South Lebanon, left the town towards Tyre, escorted by LAF and UNIFIL forces. Later Israel issued warning to residence of Arnoun, Yohmor, Zawtar El Charqiyeh, and Zawtar El Gharbiyeh residents to evacuate.

Lebanon's state-run National News Agency, reported about airstrikes over night on 11 March, that were later confirmed by the Israeli military. It was followed by an evacuation notice issued to six villages in south Lebanon. The IDF confirmed Iranian commander Ali Musallam Tabaja was killed during the airstrikes. On 12 March, an Israeli airstrike on the outskirts of the village of Ain Ebel killed three men.
Lebanon's health ministry said on 13 March that an Israeli airstrike hit a health center in Burj Qalaouiyah killing 12 people—nearly the entire medical team of paramedics, doctors, and nurses—leaving only one severely injured worker alive. Four others remain missing.
During the night of 13/14 March, fighting continued in Khiam. Israel continued to conduct airstrikes across Lebanon on 14 March, including areas outside of Hezbollah's operations. An airstrike on an apartment in Bourj Hammoud in northeastern Beirut killed at least one person and wounded four others.


=== Third week (16–22 March) ===

The IDF announced on 16 March that it had begun a "targeted ground operation against key targets" in southern Lebanon, aimed at establishing "the forward defense area." Defense Minister Israel Katz said that such operations would continue until Hezbollah no longer posed a threat to northern Israeli communities, and ruled out displaced Lebanese people returning to their homes in the south until then. He added that the operations will resemble the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip, "just as was done against Hamas in Rafah, Beit Hanoun and the terror tunnels in Gaza." Hezbollah Secretary-General Naim Qassem has been designated a target for elimination.
Four injuries were reported in northern Israel as a result of Hezbollah rocket attacks on the area, including three in Nahariya and one in Kibbutz Kabri. An Israeli soldier from the Givati Brigade was injured during an operational accident. An Israeli airstrike hit a building near Jabal Amel Hospital outside Tyre killed one person and injured five others. Fighting was reported at the Hezbollah stronghold of Al-Khiyam in southern Lebanon where a "major battle was under way" with at least three airstrikes in the city. Israel also struck targets in Yatar, Burj Qalaouiyah, as-Sultaniyah, Shaqra, Qantara, and as-Sawana.
Mahmoud Qamati, Hezbollah's political council vice president, threatened to topple the cabinet of Nawaf Salam after the war ends, comparing it to Vichy France's regime. The Kuwaiti Ministry of Interior said it arrested a 16-member Hezbollah cell with weapons, drone and encrypted communications devices, which planned an attack. On 17 March, the IDF said it had deployed a second division to southern Lebanon, launching a ground invasion. Israel Katz said the operation would be similar to the Gaza war, suggested that Israel could occupy some Lebanese territory indefinitely and ruled out the return of displaced Lebanese people to their homes as long as Hezbollah remained a threat. In a joint statement, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, and the UK said such an operation should be avoided. Syria was pressured to militarily intervene in Lebanon by the United States by sending its troops and striking positions in Lebanon alongside the IDF in order to further weaken Hezbollah; however, the Syrian government refused the offer on the same day Israel Katz declared a ground invasion of southern Lebanon. Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Egypt, and Turkey discouraged a confrontation between Syria and Hezbollah.
Israel conducted extensive overnight strikes in central Beirut on 18 March, which were largely unannounced with no warnings issued, killing at least 10 people and injuring 27. Two Israeli soldiers were wounded by a Hezbollah mortar attack in northern Israel on 21 March. Civilians were also injured as munitions fired by Hezbollah struck civilian buildings in northern Israeli border towns, including Ma'alot.

Israel's Defense Minister Katz declared that the IDF would demolish the Lebanese villages bordering Israel and destroy all the Litani river crossings. Following a warning, Israel destroyed the Qasmiyeh Bridge, the main bridge over the Litani river, connecting Lebanon and south Lebanon. Lebanese prime minister Nawaf Salam said that Hezbollah's operations are commanded by IRGC officers. The IDF reported that seven soldiers were wounded on Lebanon in separate incidents. IDF Chief of General Staff Eyal Zamir approved plans "to advance the targeted ground operations and strikes" against Hezbollah, and that this would be a "prolonged operation". The Israeli military said it killed Abu Khalil Barji, a commander in Hezbollah's Radwan Force, and two other Hezbollah operatives in an air strike in the Majdal Selem area of southern Lebanon. That same day, an Israeli avocado farmer was killed from a misfired artillery by the IDF near the Israeli–Lebanese border. Hezbollah official Wafiq Safa in an interview admitted Hezbollah had started the war for revenge over the assassination of Khamenei and threatened the Lebanese government with the repeat of the 7 May clashes.


=== Fourth week (23–29 March) ===
On 23 March the IDF struck the Dallafa Bridge in southern Lebanon, which it accuses Hezbollah of using to send militants and weapons to fight Israel. Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich stated that Israel, following the war, should annex territories up to the Litani River. Satellite imagery from 23 March showed the remains of the Khiam detention center being demolished.
The Lebanese government declared the Iranian ambassador Mohammad Reza Sheibani persona non grata on 24 March, giving him time until Sunday to leave. According to Iran International (which opposes the current Iranian regime) Iran fired a ballistic missile at Lebanon several hours after the expulsion of the ambassador was announced, and the projectile struck Lebanon's coast in Sahel Alma (Keserwan District). Other reports indicate that Sahel Alma was only hit by debris, and that it occurred when an Israeli interceptor missile shot down, over Keserwan, a ballistic missile launched from Iran. Various sources from the US military intel heavily suggest the target was located on Cyprus.
Israel's defence minister, Israel Katz openly stated that the military will take control of south Lebanon all the way to the Litani river, mirroring the claims of Smotrich from the previous day. Hassan Fadlallah, a lawmaker of Hezbollah, vowed that the group would fight Israel to prevent the plan from coming to fruition, labelling it as one of the goals of the organization during the war. 
Also on 24 March, an Israeli drone strike targeted the residence of a teacher in Ain Ebel, but the family members on the ground floor survived unharmed. Israel reported that missile fire from Lebanon killed one Israeli civilian and wounded another two. Israeli Defense minister Israel Katz states that the military will control a "security zone" up to the Litani River in southern Lebanon until the threat of Hezbollah is removed.
Nethanyahu followed Katz's and Smotrich's statement on 25 March calling for the creation of a "security/buffer zone" in Southern Lebanon. Iran asserted that Lebanon must be included as part of a ceasefire deal with the United States and Israel, thereby conditioning a ceasefire in the 2026 Iran war on a cessation of hostilities against Hezbollah. Two IDF soldiers were killed by Hezbollah attacks on Southern Lebanon on 26 March. One Israeli civilian was killed by Hezbollah rocket fire in Nahariyah. The IDF said that it was sending more troops from the 162nd Division to join two other army divisions in southern Lebanon to expand the "buffer zone" in the area.
The IDF made relatively rapid advances into southern Lebanon on 27 March, advancing north past the coastal town of Naqoura toward Bayada. Hezbollah said that it had targeted an Israeli tank in Bayada. An Israeli airstrike in southern Lebanon on 28 March killed two prominent Lebanese television journalists: Ali Choeib (also known as Ali Shaib) who worked for the Hezbollah-affiliated Al-Manar and Fatima Ftouni, who worked for the pro-Hezbollah Al Mayadeen. The IDF stated that Choeib had been exposing Israeli military positions, and described him as a member of Radwan force, Hezbollah's special operations unit. Israeli military posted a photo of Choeib in military fatigues on its X account and when asked for a source of the image, a military spokesperson said "it was photoshopped".
An IDF soldier was reported killed by a Hezbollah attack, while another three soldiers were wounded in south Lebanon. Israel killed two Lebanese paramedics in Bint Jbeil with airstrikes, and later accused Hezbollah of making "extensive military use" of ambulances and other medical facilities. Lebanese military sources told Al Jazeera that Israeli troops had bypassed Aitaroun and reached the outskirts of Wadi al-Salouqi, at the same time entering the town of Bayada, advanced towards the Litani from below the town of Qantara near al-Muhaysibat and also east of it.
The Iranian diplomatic source told Agence France-Presse the Iranian ambassador who is declared persona non grata defied the Lebanese government's order to leave.
Syrian authorities launched a crackdown on tunnels along the border with Lebanon used for smuggling arms by Hezbollah. The Syrian defense ministry announced the discovery and closure of two tunnels on the border of Lebanon used for smuggling by Hezbollah.


=== Fifth week (30 March – 5 April) ===

On 29 March, a UNIFIL position was shelled by Israel, killing a UNIFIL peacekeeper from Indonesia.
On 30 March, two more UNIFIL peacekeepers from Indonesia were killed, this time when one vehicle in a convoy was hit by an explosion. In this case, the UN states they were most likely killed by a tripwire-activated explosive device planted by Hezbollah, because another explosive device of this kind was found nearby.
Also on 30 March, a UNIFIL patrol was stopped by Hezbollah in Deir Qanoun an-Naher on its main street and ordered to leave the area, which the patrol refused, resulting in gunfire from both sides.
Israeli media reported the death of four IDF soldiers in clashes with Hezbollah, three of whom were the from the Nahal Brigade's Reconnaissance Unit.
On 1 April, an Israeli Navy strike in Beirut killed the commander of Hezbollah's Southern Front, Hajj Yusuf Ismail Hashem, whose predecessor Ali Karaki was killed in September 2024. Hezbollah confirmed Hashem's death, stating that it was their harshest loss since the killing of Haytham Ali Tabatabai in November 2025. A IDF soldier was killed and another wounded on 4 April after a friendly fire incident in Sheeba southern Lebanon, during a commando raid.
The IDF hit a four-story building on 4 April, part of a church-sponsored social housing complex, in Ain Saade, a Christian locality not far from Beirut, killing at least three people including local politician Pierre Moawad (of Lebanese Forces, a party which currently forms the ruling coalition in Lebanon and is opposed to Hezbollah), his wife, and their female neighbor. The IDF said they were targeting a Hezbollah member hiding among local Christians, and that Moawad was not the intended target. Misinformation about the strike circulated online included a faked memo (a voice note) supposedly left by Pierre Moawad before his death. An account about a man who left the building and drove away on a motorcycle roughly around the time of the strike was relayed by the slain couple's daughter to journalists; media reports quoting the Lebanese army said the man on the motorcycle was a delivery driver, who had been delivering medications to one of the building's residents for a few months but L'Orient Today later wrote that, per an anonymous judicial source, the man was an unnamed Hezbollah official visiting his girlfriend. There has been speculation that Israeli strikes on Christian communities in Lebanon are aimed at inflaming sectarian tensions.


=== Sixth week (6–12 April) ===

On 6 April, IDF spokesman Avichay Adraee ordered the southern suburbs of Beirut to be evacuated, because Israel will strike "Hezbollah infrastructure" there. The Israeli Ground Forces deployed the 98th Division into southern Lebanon on 7 April, in addition to the 36th, 91st, 146th, and 162nd divisions already there. The stated goal of their operation was to destroy buildings near the border being used for military purposes and to push Hezbollah members north of the Litani River. According to the Israeli paper Yedioth Ahronoth, the IDF was preparing a plan to continue the operations and ground occupation in Lebanon even after the Iran war ends. Hezbollah said on the same day that "fierce clashes" were taking place between its fighters and Israeli troops in Bint Jbeil, and that rocket and drone strikes targeted soldiers and Merkava tanks in the town, and in other settlements in southern Lebanon or northern Israel. Israeli troops destroyed buildings in Khiam and other border towns.
Israel agreed to a two-week ceasefire with Iran as part of the 7 April 2026 Iran war ceasefire. Although Pakistani prime minister Shehbaz Sharif said that the ceasefire includes all fronts of the war, including Lebanon, Israel rejected Sharif's condition, asserting that the ceasefire "does not include Lebanon." The United States has also said that the ceasefire does not include Lebanon. Hezbollah said that it had halted attacks on Israel and on Israeli soldiers in Lebanon.
Hours after the ceasefire announcement, Israel launched Operation Eternal Darkness on 8 April, which, per Israel, included a wide-ranging operation targeting all of Hezbollah's command and control centers in southern Lebanon, Beirut and the Bekaa Valley. The attacks were the largest since the start of the war, with Israel saying that its military hit over 100 targets within ten minutes. The attacks have killed at least 357 people. One IDF soldier was killed and five wounded in clashes with Hezbollah fighters in South Lebanon.
In the early hours of 9 April, Hezbollah said it launched a missile attack against northern Israel. Meanwhile, in Lebanon, Israeli strikes continued. Later, the IDF announced that it had killed Hezbollah leader Naim Qassem's personal secretary and nephew, Ali Yusuf Harshi in a strike on Beirut. Hezbollah was also reported to have fired "dozens" of rockets into Israel from Lebanon. At around 17:00 Israel Daylight Time, The Jerusalem Post reported that the 98th Division of the IDF had almost fully taken control of all of the town of Bint Jbeil, which had become the main site of ground combat between Hezbollah and the IDF. 
On early 10 April, Israel launched a wave of strikes across Lebanon, killing at least 28 people, including 13 Lebanese State Security personnel at an office in Nabatieh. During a visit to Israeli commanders near Bint Jbeil, IDF chief of staff Eyal Zamir said that the IDF is in a "state of war" in Lebanon, despite the ceasefire with Iran.
On 12 April, a Lebanese security source informed that the Israeli army cut off all main roads leading to besieged Bint Jbeil and kept pounding it with air strikes, artillery shells and white phosphorus bombs, but still hasn't been yet able to capture important sites within the city itself, with clashes occurring all over the city outskirts. Prime Minister Netanyahu and Defense Minister Katz visited Israeli troops inside Lebanon, with Katz saying that Israel will eliminate the threat "just as we did in Gaza," including with the demolition of homes so that they cannot be used as "terror outposts."


=== Seventh week (13–19 April) ===
On 13 April, the IDF said to have killed over 100 Hezbollah fighters in Bint Jbeil in the past several days and to have successfully encircled the city, stating the complete takeover is expected to take a few more days. One IDF sergeant was killed in combat in Southern Lebanon.
On 15 April, Israel and Hezbollah forces in Lebanon engaged in more strikes against each other. A day later, two Israeli airstrikes destroyed the Qasmiyeh Bridge, the last remaining link between the area south of the Litani River and the rest of the country. 
On 16 April, President Trump announced that Israel and Lebanon agreed to a 10-day truce, after his conversations with Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Aoun. The ceasefire entered into force on the night of 16/17 April local time. The IDF said the death of Ali Reda Abbas and other unnamed Hezbollah commanders, and alleged to have eliminated over 150 militants by the end of operations. Israeli defense minister Katz said that the IDF will hold its positions in southern Lebanon, and the Israeli military warned residents of the area to remain north of the Litani River, while the Lebanese military reported several violations of the ceasefire by Israel. The violations reportedly took place with attacks in Khiam and Bint Jbeil, and shelling in Dibbin. According to IDF commanders, residents will not be allowed to return to 55 villages that are in its operational zone, and PM Netanyahu stressed that the fight against Hezbollah is not over.
On 17 April, Israel killed one Hezbollah member in a drone strike on a motorcycle, and throughout 17 April and 18 April killed other Hezbollah members in several other strikes in Lebanon, in at least two cases stating that the Hezbollah members posed a threat. On 17 April, an IDF soldier was killed in Lebanon after entering a building previously rigged with explosives by Hezbollah. On 18 April, another IDF soldier was killed and 9 others wounded, one severely, when one of IDF bulldozers drove over an explosive device. Israel continued to perform demolitions of buildings in Israeli-occupied areas of Lebanon.
Israel said it continued strikes on military targets, which came in violation of the ceasefire. According to a security source familiar to Asharq Al-Awsat, the violations included artillery bombardments, drone strikes, house-to-house fighting, laying booby traps and destruction of houses.
A French soldier was killed by gunfire and three others injured in an attack on UNIFIL peacekeepers in Deir Kifa on 18 April. French president Emmanuel Macron attributed the attack to Hezbollah, which the group denied. Another French UNIFIL peacekeeper who was wounded in the attack died on 22 April from his injuries.
The Israeli military announced on the same day that it established a "yellow line" in southern Lebanon, like it did in Gaza. The zone which Israel intends to control, as marked on a map published by the IDF, covers a larger area than Israeli ground forces controlled at the moment of the ceasefire: a wider belt of Lebanon's southernmost areas, plus new areas of the Marjayoun District and even some areas north of the Litani River; and an area around the town of Shebaa (not to be confused with Shebaa Farms) and northeast of it. In total, the zone encompasses 55 towns and villages. Israeli ground forces continued military operations within that zone during the ceasefire.
On the afternoon of 19 April, according to Hezbollah, their members used explosive devices against a column of Israeli tanks (between Taybeh and Deir Siryan).

Widespread outrage has erupted following the circulation of a viral photograph and video showing an Israeli soldier smashing a statue of Jesus Christ with a sledgehammer in the southern Lebanese village of Debel. The incident