The Twelve-Day War was an armed conflict between Iran and Israel which lasted from 13 to 24 June 2025. It began when Israel bombed military and nuclear facilities in Iran in a surprise attack, assassinating prominent military leaders, nuclear scientists, and politicians, killing civilians, and damaging or destroying air defenses. Iran retaliated with over 550 ballistic missiles and over 1,000 suicide drones, hitting civilian population centers, one hospital and at least twelve military, energy, and government sites. The United States intercepted Iranian attacks and bombed three Iranian nuclear sites on 22 June. Iran retaliated by firing missiles at a US base in Qatar. On 24 June, Israel and Iran agreed to a ceasefire under US pressure.
The war followed a decades-long proxy conflict in which Iran supported an Axis of Resistance against Israeli and US interests in the region. Iran's development of nuclear enrichment capabilities has been an international controversy for decades, with Israel and its allies seeking to prevent Iranian nuclear weapons development. In 2015, under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), six countries lifted sanctions on Iran, which froze its nuclear program. In 2018, US president Donald Trump unilaterally withdrew from the plan. Iran began stockpiling enriched uranium and largely suspended International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) monitoring. Following the October 7 attacks in 2023, both Hamas and Hezbollah entered into open conflict with Israel. In April 2024, Israel bombed Iran's consulate in Damascus, Syria, killing senior Iranian military officials. Direct conflict continued in April and October of 2024. The day before Israel started the Twelve-Day War in June 2025, the IAEA declared Iran non-compliant with its nuclear obligations in a resolution put forward by the United States, United Kingdom, France, and Germany. 
Israel's attacks, which reportedly involved commando units and Mossad operatives in Iran, killed several of Iran's military leaders, leaders of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), and at least 10 leading nuclear scientists. The war saw internet blackouts by the Iranian government. Israeli and US airstrikes damaged the nuclear facilities at Natanz, Isfahan, and Fordow, damaging them extensively. Iran suspended cooperation with the IAEA, which it said had passed information about nuclear facilities and scientists to Israel. Iran's total death toll has been estimated at between 1,060 and 1,190; thousands were wounded, tens of thousands were displaced, and the government ordered internet blackouts. Israel struck high-rise buildings, including apartments. Iranian missiles struck military and government sites, apartments, a research center, and a hospital.
The United Nations and most countries expressed deep concern over Israel's strikes and called for a diplomatic solution. The strikes were condemned by many countries, including most Muslim-majority and Arab states. The International Commission of Jurists and some other legal scholars saw the Israeli strikes as a violation of international law. Meanwhile, Argentina, Germany, Ukraine, and the United States said the strikes on Iran were justified to prevent nuclear proliferation and said Iran should agree to a nuclear deal promptly. Nine months later, on 28 February 2026, Israel and the United States launched strikes on Iran, beginning the 2026 Iran war.


== Name ==
Donald Trump first labeled the conflict as the "12 day war" in his announcement of a ceasefire agreement between Israel and Iran on 23 June 2025. AP News speculated the title was a reference to the 1967 Six-Day War, fought between Israel and a coalition of Arab states. A few days afterwards, American academic Howard Stoffer also compared the two wars to each other, and Reuters began using "12-day war" as a descriptive title; however, some experts initially doubted that Trump's coining would catch on. Ultimately, the standardized name "Twelve-Day War" or "Twelve Day War" entered into common usage by late 2025. In Iran, however, the conflict is labeled as the "Second Imposed War".


== Background ==


=== Iran–Israel conflict ===

Israel maintained a close relationship with the Pahlavi monarchy until the Iranian Revolution, when the monarchy was ousted and replaced by an anti-Western theocratic Islamic republic led by Ruhollah Khomeini. Ever since, Iran's government has repeatedly pledged to destroy Israel. Israel considers the Iranian nuclear program an existential threat, fearing that Iran will develop a nuclear weapon.
In 2024, Israel and Iran attacked each other openly and directly for the first time following decades of proxy war. In April 2024, an Israeli airstrike on the Iranian consulate in Damascus killed Iranian officers. Iran retaliated with strikes on Israel in April 2024, to which Israel then retaliated with strikes on Iran. In July 2024, Israel assassinated Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh in Iran's capital Tehran, and then assassinated Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah and prominent IRGC commander Abbas Nilforoushan in Lebanon in September 2024. In October 2024, Iran struck Israel, and Israel struck Iran. The latter Israeli strikes destroyed nearly all of Iran's Russian-supplied defensive S-300 missile systems, paving the way for potential future Israeli strikes.


=== Iranian nuclear program ===

Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu cited Iran's nuclear program as the reason Israel preemptively struck Iran. The country developed a covert nuclear weapons program named the AMAD Project in the 1980s and 1990s, which, according to US intelligence assessments, was suspended in 2003.
Iran had consistently said that its nuclear program is solely for peaceful purposes and that it has never intended to develop nuclear weapons. However, since 2019, it had repeatedly violated the terms of the previous nuclear deal of 2015, and in June 2025 the IAEA reported that Iran had acquired enough enriched uranium to produce nine nuclear warheads.
In 2015, six countries negotiated with Iran the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action nuclear deal to lift sanctions on Iran and freeze Iran's nuclear program. In 2018, after being briefed on evidence that Iran sought to resume its nuclear weapons development, U.S. president Donald Trump unilaterally withdrew from and voided the deal – despite the report by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that Iran was keeping to the deal. After the withdrawal Iran began stockpiling enriched uranium, and the IAEA lost the ability to monitor Iran's nuclear facilities.
In a letter addressed to the president of the UN Security Council, the foreign ministers of France, Britain and Germany (E3) stated that since 2019, Iran had "increasingly and deliberately ceased performing its JCPOA commitments", including "the accumulation of a highly enriched uranium stockpile which lacks any credible civilian justification and is unprecedented for a state without a nuclear weapons program,"  a statement confirmed by the IAEA. The letter detailed additional Iranian violations of the agreement despite the fact that the E3 "have consistently upheld their agreements under the terms of the JCPOA".
In March 2025, US Director of National Intelligence, Tulsi Gabbard, testified that the US intelligence community assessed that "Iran is not building a nuclear weapon". A month later, Trump announced negotiations between the United States and Iran regarding Iran's nuclear program. The White House declared that Iran had two months to secure a deal, which expired the day before Israel's strikes. On 31 May 2025, the IAEA issued a report in which it stated that Iran had enough uranium enriched up to 60% for the production of nine nuclear weapons, and enough for additional weapons at lower enrichment levels.
On 12 June 2025, the IAEA board of governors passed a resolution, drafted by the US, UK, France and Germany, that declared that Iran was non-compliant with its nuclear obligations for the first time since September 2005. IAEA director general Rafael Grossi stated in an interview that the IAEA did "not have any proof of a systematic effort to move into a nuclear weapon", on the other hand, in his statement to the board of governors on 9 June he stated that "Unless and until Iran assists the agency in resolving the outstanding safeguards issues, the Agency will not be in a position to provide assurance that Iran's nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful".


=== Axis of Resistance ===

Israel has fought wars with Iranian proxies including against Hezbollah since the 1982 Lebanon War. In the October 7 attacks in 2023, Hamas, an Iranian proxy in Gaza, started the Gaza war, following which Israel severely weakened both Hamas and fellow Iranian proxy Hezbollah in Lebanon, while also attacking the Houthis in Yemen. This is said to have weakened Iranian deterrence and increased Iranian isolation.


=== Gaza war ===

Israel's strikes on Iran came against the backdrop of its ongoing war with Iran-aligned Hamas in Gaza and a broader escalation of its military actions across the region, including Israeli military activity in Lebanon, Yemen, Syria, and the occupied West Bank. They also came in the context of a risk of famine and humanitarian crisis in the Israeli blockaded Gaza Strip that a growing number of scholars and human rights organizations have described as a genocide. In the weeks leading up to Israeli attacks, the Israeli government faced international pressure over the high risk of famine in Gaza and killing of civilians. Even Israel's allies in Europe had become critical of the starvation in Gaza, and the EU had announced it would reconsider its free-trade deal with Israel. Political scientists stated that the attack on Iran provided a distraction from Israel's actions in Gaza. Nesrine Malik said the attack was an attempt by Israel to bring a Europe alienated by Israel's action in the suffering in Gaza back to its side.


=== Announcement ===
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced Operation Rising Lion, targeting Iran's main enrichment facility in Natanz, its nuclear scientists, and parts of its ballistic missile program. He described Iran's nuclear efforts as "a clear and present danger to Israel's very survival", and said the operation would continue "for as many days as it takes".
In a speech announcing the attack, Netanyahu stated that for decades, Iran's leaders had openly called for Israel's destruction and warned that Iran could produce a nuclear weapon "in a very short time. It could be a year. It could be within a few months, less than a year."


== Timeline ==


=== 13 June ===

In the early hours of 13 June 2025, the IDF attacked dozens of Iranian nuclear facilities, military bases and infrastructure installations, and key military commanders. By 06:30 IDT, the Israeli Air Force (IAF) had launched five waves of air strikes, using more than 200 fighter jets to drop more than 330 munitions on about 100 targets. Israeli targets included the Natanz Nuclear Facility and other infrastructure of Iran's nuclear program, with no nuclear accidents occurring as a result of the airstrikes. Meanwhile, the Mossad operatives along with commando forces sabotaged Iran's air defense systems and missile infrastructure. An Israeli official said the Mossad had smuggled precision weapons and established a covert drone base near Tehran, which were used to disable air defenses, securing air superiority for Israeli aircraft. The operations in the early hours, which killed 30 Iranian generals in minutes as well as nine nuclear scientists, are referred to as Operation Red Wedding and Operation Narnia.
Israel conducted strikes in Tabriz in the early afternoon, reportedly targeting an area near Tabriz Airport. Explosions also occurred at the Hamadan Airbase the Parchin military base, and the subterranean Fordow Fuel Enrichment Plant. The IDF later confirmed striking the Hamadan and Tabriz airbases and the Isfahan Nuclear Technology/Research Center. Iranian media reported that at least two Israeli fighter jets were downed over Iranian airspace and a female pilot was captured. The IDF denied this.

After the Israeli attack, Iranian leaders promised a "harsh response", with attacks against Israeli and US forces in military bases across the Middle East. Shortly thereafter, Iran launched missiles and drones at military bases and air bases under the codename Operation True Promise III. These included more than 100 Shahed drones, according to IDF Brigadier General Effie Defrin. The US evacuated some of its troops from Iraq and also authorized the evacuation of family members of US troops across the region. Around 9 p.m. IDT—10 minutes before dozens of missiles hit—Israeli citizens received IDF Home Front Command phone alerts about an incoming attack. Some Iranian missiles hit targets in Tel Aviv including the Da Vinci high-rise apartment building and shopping centre on the corner of Leonardo Da Vinci and Kaplan Streets immediately bordering the Kirya military headquarters near Begin Road; others were shot down. Sirens were activated in Amman, Jordan's capital. Some drones were intercepted by the Royal Jordanian Air Force in Jordanian air space; some by the IAF over Saudi Arabia and Syria. Various Israeli sources said that an order for Israeli civilians to seek shelter was later lifted, suggesting that a majority or all of the drones were destroyed. An intercepted drone fell on a house and wounded three people in Irbid, Jordan.
Several hours later, Iranian state media announced that accurate military and intelligence sites had been targeted in retaliation for earlier Israeli attacks on Iranian territory.
At least 63 Israelis were injured: one critically, one seriously, eight mildly, and the rest lightly, according to Magen David Adom. One civilian woman later died of her wounds. Seven soldiers were lightly injured. The Israel Fire and Rescue Services rescued two people from a building struck in Tel Aviv, while the IDF's Home Front Command rescued another civilian from a building in the city. The IDF estimated that around 150 ballistic missiles were fired in two waves during the attack, which did little damage. Al-Mayadeen reports that Iranian missiles struck a nuclear energy research facility in Tel Aviv. The Israeli military has prohibited the public from sharing photos and videos depicting the damage and destruction resulting from the Iranian missile attack. Elsewhere, The Houthis fired a ballistic missile from Yemen at Jerusalem. It landed in Sa'ir, West Bank, injuring five Palestinians, including three children.


=== 14 June ===

In the early morning of 14 June, Iranian media reported an explosion and a fire at Tehran's Mehrabad International Airport. It also reported Iranian air defenses engaging Israeli projectiles above Isfahan and exchanging fire with Israeli drones on reconnaissance missions in northwestern Iran. The IDF later said that it bombed an underground facility in western Iran used to store ballistic and cruise missiles. Iran confirmed the deaths of General Gholamreza Mehrabi and General Mehdi Rabbani. Iran also made unsubstantiated claims to have downed three Israeli F-35 jets, captured two pilots, and killed a third, and the IDF repeatedly denied claims of air force casualties or damage. Iran's Ministry of Petroleum announced attacks on two oil fields in Bushehr province, where fires halted the production of gas. The Red Crescent Society said Israel had attacked 18 of the 31 provinces of Iran. In the evening, the IDF announced a new wave of strikes on "military targets" in Tehran, which cut off electricity in the Shahran neighborhood, striking oil and gasoline depots, the Iranian Ministry of Defence headquarters, and the Organization of Defensive Innovation and Research building.
Iran launched 200 ballistic missiles overnight, killing two people, injuring more than 60, and heavily damaging several homes were reported heavily damaged, and at least two civilians killed and more than 20 injured. The IDF asserted that a "small number" of missiles evaded air defenses, struck residential areas, and caused casualties in Tel Aviv, Ramat Gan, and Rishon LeZion The US help intercept incoming missiles.
According to Xinhua News Agency, several Iranian missiles transited Syrian airspace en route to Israel, with at least two missiles falling in Daraa Governorate (southern Syria). Reportedly, several Arab states have participated in shooting down Iranian drones, or sharing radar information to help in destroying them.
In the night, Iran fired another barrage of missiles targeting northern Israel, killing five people and injuring at least 23 others. A fire also broke out near the BAZAN oil refinery in Haifa, where pipes and transmission lines were damaged.
The U.S. 6th Fleet stationed five Arleigh Burke class destroyers (Thomas Hudner, Arleigh Burke, The Sullivans, Oscar Austin and Paul Ignatius) in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea to assist with Israeli missile defense and disrupt Iranian air strikes. In February 2025, the Department of Defense awarded the Armed Forces Service Medal to the USS Arleigh Burke for its role in shooting down missiles in the conflict.


=== 15 June ===

On the morning of 15 June, Iran and the Houthis in Yemen launched ballistic missiles simultaneously, striking buildings in Bat Yam and Rehovot, a mall in Kiryat Ekron, and in Tel Aviv. In Bat Yam, 61 buildings were damaged, according to Mayor Tzvika Brot. Nine people were killed and about 200 people were injured, according to the MDA. Israel later said that it intercepted most of the missiles and that the remainder failed to enter Israeli territory.
In Rehovot, Iranian missiles struck the Weizmann Institute of Science and damaged dozens of other buildings. Debris from Iranian missiles also hit two sites in the West Bank. A Shahab-class missile caused a rooftop fire in al-Bireh, close to Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority. Three children were wounded outside Sa'ir by debris from an intercepted missile.
Later in the day, Iran fired a barrage consisting of several ballistic missiles at Israel, Iran also fired a missile at an area in Caesarea, near the Netanyahu family home. The IDF announced that the missiles were intercepted, with at least 50 rockets downed. In the evening, Iran fired several barrages of missiles at Israel, injuring seven people in Haifa and one in Kiryat Gat, and causing fires and property damage.
A strike was reported on the Ministry of Justice building in Tehran and the IAF said that it bombed a refueling plane at the Mashhad Shahid Hasheminejad International Airport in what was possibly the most distant operation in its history. Israel also struck surface-to-surface missiles in Iran as well as military bases and the Iranian foreign ministry. Missiles struck and killed the intelligence chief and the intelligence deputy chief of the IRGC. Along with the airstrikes, five car bombs detonated across Tehran, with explosions taking place next to government and nuclear-related sites and killing several nuclear scientists. and an Israeli official denied any involvement. The IDF otherwise warned Iranian civilians to evacuate from the areas surrounding weapon factories and military bases in Shiraz.
Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian reportedly sustained light injuries to his leg following an airstrike targeting a meeting of the Supreme National Security Council in Tehran. He escaped with other officials through an emergency hatch.


=== 16 June ===

The IDF hit the command center of the Quds Force in Tehran. Iran International reported explosions were heard in the vicinity of the Fordow nuclear facility. IDF strikes were said to have taken place in the vicinity of the Parchin military installations. The IRGC's Ansar al-Mahdi Corps reported that one of its commanders and a soldier were killed in an attack in Ijrud County of Zanjan province.
The IDF said it has destroyed 120 surface-to-surface missile launchers in Iran. Brigadier-General Effie Defrin said that 30% of Iran's missile launchers have been destroyed and said it destroyed a weapons convoy between Tehran and Qom. IRNA reported that Israeli forces struck the Farabi Hospital in Kermanshah, causing significant damage and at least 15 buildings in the Kermanshah missile factory were hit by Israel. Israel bombed the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB) state broadcaster during a live broadcast. At least one IRIB employee was killed in the attack, while the station said its offices were struck by four bombs. Israel issued evacuation orders to residents of some areas of Tehran and hit Iranian missile launchers in western Iran. The IDF said one of its drones destroyed two Iranian F-14s. Nour News reported that Iranian forces claim to have shot down an F-35 over Tabriz. The IDF hit a building killing Iran's intelligence chief and other key senior officials. Mohammad Kazemi, Hassan Mohaghegh, and Mohammad Khatami were confirmed to have been killed by the airstrike. According to Iran International, Khamenei was moved to a bunker located in the town of Lavizan, along with his family.

Iran launched another barrage of missiles against Israel and fragments were reported to have caused damage to the US Embassy Branch Office in Tel Aviv. A school in Tel Aviv as well as homes in Bnei Brak, Haifa and Petah Tikva were hit. Eight civilians were killed and over 90 were injured. Israel reported 287 people were hospitalized overnight. Haifa's oil refinery was also targeted, causing significant damage and killing three workers. According to Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft executive vice president Trita Parsi, successive Iranian missile attacks may have eroded Israeli defenses, allowing a larger percentage of missiles to get through than before. Following the attacks, Israel confirmed 24 fatalities to date, the majority of which occurred outside bomb shelters, and had tallied 350 Iranian missiles, clustering around 30–60 at a time. Additionally, a drone fired toward the US consulate in Erbil, Iraq, was intercepted. Iran fired ballistic missiles at Petah Tikva again, killing four people and injuring 15 people. Among the victims was Holocaust survivor Ivette Shmilovitz. Two missiles also hit Tel Aviv, destroying a number of buildings.


=== 17 June ===

In the morning, Iran launched about 20 missiles at Israel, lightly injuring five people, and struck targets across Israel, hitting Tel Aviv as well as residential neighbourhoods in Bat Yam and Tamra. Ynet reported that an Iranian missile struck the city of Herzliya, damaging an eight-story building and setting an empty bus on fire. Explosions were heard in the Dan district surrounding Tel Aviv and West Jerusalem. The IDF said it shot down 30 Iranian drones overnight. The IRGC claimed to have hit a military intelligence centre and a Mossad operations planning centre. Four impacts occurred in Tel Aviv, with one directly striking Camp Moshe Dayan. An Iranian ballistic missile attack toward northern Israel during the evening was successfully intercepted by Israel.
The IDF said 40% of Iran's ballistic missile launchers had been destroyed. The Institute for the Study of War in the US noted that the five morning attacks had fewer missiles than previous salvos, which it held as indicating a degradation of Iran's missile forces.
The IDF assassinated Major-General Ali Shadmani just days after he was appointed as a commander of Khatam al-Anbiya Central Headquarters. According to The Jerusalem Post, Shadmani was killed alongside dozens of IRGC officers. Israel said that it conducted "several extensive strikes" on military targets in western Iran, targeting missile launchers and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) storage facilities. According to Mehr News Agency, an Israeli rocket hit a checkpoint in Kashan, killing three people and injuring four others. Israeli forces struck a residential building in Tehran, according to IRNA, which also reported that three people were rescued from the rubble by the Red Crescent. The IDF announced that it conducted heavy strikes against Iranian ballistic missile launchers in Isfahan using 60 fighter jets and that 12 missile storage and launch sites were hit during the attacks. The state-owned Bank Sepah was targeted in a cyberattack, with the hacker group Predatory Sparrow claiming responsibility. Israeli jets hit Iranian missile launchers in western Iran and the Iranian Army claimed to have shot down 28 "hostile aircraft" including a spy drone. Israel denied the latter claims.


=== 18 June ===
The IDF said that 50 fighter jets struck around 20 buildings in Tehran, including factories producing raw materials, components and manufacturing systems for ballistic missiles. Iranian media said that the IDF struck an IRGC-affiliated university and a missile factory in Khojir. The IDF also said it had destroyed 70 missile batteries. Israel also attacked nuclear centrifuge production sites, with the IAEA confirming strikes on Karaj's TESA Complex and the Tehran Research Complex.
In the morning, Israel hit sites in Tehran and issued an evacuation order for people in district 18 of Tehran. Iran's internal security headquarters was destroyed during the attacks, according to Israel. An Iranian Red Crescent building was also reportedly struck. Iranian media reported that Iranian forces shot down a "hostile" F-35 jet in the Javadabad area of Varamin.
In the afternoon, the IDF said that it had struck 40 military targets in western Iran, including a primed Emad missile launcher, missile storage sites, and soldiers, with 25 fighter jets. To date, IDF spokesperson Effie Defrin said that 1,100 targets in Iran had been struck by Israel. He added that five AH-1 helicopters were struck in Kermanshah in the morning. Later, the IDF said that it destroyed three more AH-1 helicopters. The IDF later announced that 60 fighter jets participated in a wave of strikes against 20 targets in Tehran, including weapon manufacturing facilities, centrifuge production sites, and nuclear research and development locations.
During the night Israel downed three Iranian drones. In the evening, Iran fired a single ballistic missile at Israel, setting off sirens in Tel Aviv and the surrounding area. According to the IRGC, the long-range Sejjil missile was used in the attack and one man was lightly injured. By 18 June, the IDF estimated that Iran launched 400 missiles and 1,000 drones at Israel since the conflict began. It added that only 20 missiles impacted urban areas and less than 200 drones entered Israeli airspace.


=== 19 June ===
The IAF hit targets in Tehran with airstrikes during the night of 18 June. In the morning, Israel hit dozens of military facilities in Iran including air defense and missile production sites.
The IR-40 reactor containment building at the Arak Nuclear Complex was destroyed as were nearby distillation towers. Earlier in the day, Israel had told told residents of the surrounding areas of Arak and Khondab to evacuate. Israel said there was no danger of radiation leakage. The IAEA said that the reactor was "not operational and contained no nuclear material". The IDF said it believes it has destroyed two thirds of the Iran's missile launchers. The IDF said that its drones struck Iranian soldiers who were repairing ballistic missile launchers.
Overnight Iran fired a ballistic missile salvo at Israel that was intercepted by the IDF. Israel also downed two Iranian drones headed toward the north of Israel. In the early morning, Iran fired a barrage of around 20 ballistic missiles at Israel, striking at least four sites in central and southern Israel, including the Soroka Medical Center in Beersheba, Tel Aviv, Ramat Gan, and Holon. According to Israel's Ministry of Health, 271 people were injured, and a Soroka hospital spokesperson reported significant damage to the hospital. A cluster bomb was also used in the attack, with one hitting a home in Azor.
The Soroka Medical Center suffered a direct hit, causing extensive damage and a suspected chemical leak. Seventy-one people were lightly injured there. Israeli president Isaac Herzog said the hospital was a "beacon of coexistence for Israelis and Palestinians". In Ramat Gan, 22 people were injured, a missile impacted near several high-rise buildings, and several apartment buildings were damaged with 16 people were injured. Later, Iran fired at least 10 missiles at northern Israel, with no reports of impacts or casualties.


=== 20 June ===

Overnight, the IDF claimed to have targeted Iranian military sites, including missile production facilities, the SPND program headquarters, and a Tehran nuclear research center, later reporting the destruction of 35 missile launchers.
While the IDF stated it targeted infrastructure in western and central Iran, Iranian media reported a drone strike on a Gisha district residential building, allegedly a Basij military base, and the assassination of an unnamed nuclear scientist.
Iranian missile barrages struck Beersheba, damaging apartment blocks, the central rail station, and sparking fires near high-tech facilities, resulting in seven civilian injuries. Subsequent strikes involving 25 missiles hit Haifa, striking the Al-Jarina Mosque, as well as central and southern Israel, injuring 23 people. Reports indicated cluster bomb use in Beersheba and explosions in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. Cabinet secretary Yossi Fox noted that of 520 ballistic missiles fired by Iran, only 25 impacted the ground, a 5% impact rate.


=== 21 June ===
Israel struck three buildings in Isfahan, with Iranian media reporting that a nuclear facility was targeted. Defense Minister Israel Katz said the IDF killed Quds Force commander Saeed Izadi and struck the vehicle of IRGC commander Behnam Shahriyari. Iran confirmed the killing of a tenth nuclear scientist, Isar Tabatabai-Qamsheh.
The IAEA stated that a centrifuge workshop in the nuclear research complex in Isfahan was destroyed by the Israeli strikes. IAF struck a residential building in Qom, while explosions were reported over Najafabad, Malard, Isfahan and Tehran. Israeli airstrikes targeted a nuclear site in Isfahan, according to the deputy provincial governor who spoke to the Fars new agency. Fars reported that the air defense system in Isfahan had been activated. The IDF said that it hit a military installation in Shiraz, no casualties were reported, and following an Israeli airstrike, the headquarters of the Iranian Cyber Police (FATA) in Tehran sustained significant damage.
The IDF announced that it attacked dozens of military targets in the Ahvaz area, using 30 fighter jets that dropped around 50 munitions. Among the targets were a ballistic missile storage facility and a radar site. A strike in Tehran killed a former bodyguard of assassinated Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah alongside a member of Kata'ib Sayyid al-Shuhada. Later, the IDF said that around 60 fighter jets conducted strikes in central Iran in the evening, destroying three F-14 fighter jets.
Fires broke out in Tel Aviv and the nearby city of Holon after Iran launched a new wave of missiles and struck a residential building in Beit Shean, although no injuries were reported. The IDF said that it intercepted 40 Iranian drones overnight, and added that 470 drones were shot down since the war began, a 99% interception rate. An Iranian Shahed-136 managed to strike a home in Beit She'an, causing damage, while another hit an open area near Highway 90 in the Arabah area.


=== 22 June: US strikes on Iran nuclear sites ===

According to the IDF, 20 fighter jets conducted overnight strikes on dozens of military targets in central Iran, including weapons production and storage sites, air defenses, and infrastructure at Isfahan International Airport. In the morning, the IDF said that it destroyed two Iranian F-5 fighter jets at Dezful Airport alongside eight ballistic missile launchers, killing nearby soldiers. Strong explosions were heard in Tehran, Isfahan and Bandar Lengeh, with Iranian air defense systems being activated.
Explosions were also heard in Bushehr. Iranian media reported that Israel struck a power plant and a military garrison in Yazd. The IDF confirmed conducting simultaneous strikes in the areas of Isfahan, Bushehr, Ahvaz, and Yazd, using 30 fighter jets that dropped around 60 munitions. Among the targets were the 'Imam Hussein' strategic missile headquarters in Yazd, an Iranian drone regiment headquarters, air defense battery factories, missile launchers, and drone storage sites. The strikes killed several Iranian military personnel who were operating at launch platforms.

Later, the IDF said that 20 warplanes dropped 30 munitions against targets that included ballistic missile sites, satellites, and radars in Kermanshah and Hamadan, and an air defense system in the center of Tehran.
Iranian media reported that an Israeli Hermes 900 drone was shot down by Iranian air defense. The Iranian media also reported that Majid Masibi, who the Islamic Republic accused of "spying for Israel", had been executed.
The IDF stated that Iran launched 27 missiles at Israel in two barrages with 11 sites being hit spanning from the occupied Golan Heights, to the Upper Galilee, to the northern and central coastal areas of Israel and "extensive damages" were reported in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Eighty-six people were injured in the strikes. Thirteen people were lightly injured when a strike hit a building in Tel Aviv, and six others were hurt in Ness Ziona. A man was moderately hurt on Route 431 near Be'er Ya'akov. An undetected Iranian missile also hit a public square in Haifa, lightly injuring three people.

On 22 June, the United States joined the war on Israel's side and struck the Fordow, Natanz, and Isfahan Iranian nuclear sites, using B2 bombers and Tomahawk missiles. President Trump said that the targeted facilities were "totally obliterated". In response, the Iranian government said that the Fordow site was not seriously damaged. IRIB said that only Fordow's exit and entry tunnels were destroyed but not the facility itself. Later on, however, Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi admitted that nuclear sites sustained severe damage. Although initial U.S. intelligence assessments indicated that the U.S. airstrikes did not destroy Iran's nuclear capability and only delayed it for a few months, the Pentagon has since concluded that it set back Iran by one to two years. Satellite images of Fordow facility were released by the Associated Press shortly after the strikes. The images showed damage to the entrances of the facility which are blocked by dirt, and also several large holes/craters in the mountain which the facility is under.
Prior to the strikes, satellite images of the facility appeared to show increase in logistics, with multiple trucks/heavy machinery gathering near the site, suggesting a pos