The State of Israel and Turkey formally established diplomatic relations in March 1949. Less than a year after the Israeli Declaration of Independence, Turkey recognized Israeli sovereignty, making it the world's first Muslim-majority country to do so. Both countries gave high priority to bilateral cooperation in the areas of diplomacy and military/strategic ties, while sharing concerns with respect to the regional instabilities in the Middle East.
In recent decades, particularly under Turkey's Erdoğan administration, the two countries' relationship with each other has deteriorated considerably. However, diplomatic ties were reinstated after a normalization initiative in mid-2022. Relations soured again after the October 7 attacks and Gaza war, with Turkey condemning Israel and backing Hamas. On 13 November 2024, Erdoğan announced his intention to sever Turkey's diplomatic relations with Israel.


== Overview ==
In 1999, The New York Times reported that the strategic partnership between Turkey and Israel had the potential to alter Middle East politics: Trade and tourism were booming, the Israel Air Force practiced maneuvers in Turkish airspace and Israeli technicians were modernizing Turkish combat jets. There were also plans for high-tech cooperation and water sharing.

Recep Tayyip Erdoğan paid an official visit to Israel in 2005 and said  he hoped to play a role in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict.  Relations deteriorated after the 2008–09 Gaza War and the 2010 Gaza flotilla raid. In March 2013, Israel apologized for the raid, opening a path for normalized relations. Alleged Turkish involvement in exposure of Israeli special agents in Iran in October 2013 created further tension. In December 2015, Turkey and Israel held a secret meeting to negotiate restoration of diplomatic relations. They reached an agreement on 27 June 2016 to start normalizing ties.
In December 2017, Erdoğan threatened to break off ties again, this time due to United States recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.


== History ==


=== Ottoman policy towards Jews ===
Under Sultan Bayezid II,  the Ottoman Empire was welcoming and supportive of Jewish refugees. As a  result, the Jews were fiercely loyal to the Ottoman Empire during the anti-Ottoman rebellions in the Balkans and fled to regions under its jurisdiction when persecution intensified against Jews in Russian Empire and Western Europe.  Zionist leader Theodor Herzl even asked then-Ottoman Sultan, Abdul Hamid II, to acquire Palestine and fulfil the promise of returning to Zion.
However, with the rise of Turkish nationalism in late 19th century, Jews started to bear pressure, as the Young Turks government were determined to Turkify all non-Turk subjects, including Jews. Eventually, with the outbreak of World War I, the Ottoman Empire had begun losing its tolerance toward Jews, and openly demonstrated systematic oppression and deportation on the Jewish subjects, accusing them of collaborating with the British Empire. Many Jews were also either suspected to be Russian agents, since most Jews migrated to Palestine were from Russia at the time, despite various figures like David Ben-Gurion and Yitzhak Ben-Zvi sought to ally with Turkey, eventually led to deportation and repression on Jews intensified. The hostility against Ottoman Empire among Jews increased leading to the establishment of Nili, a Jewish espionage spy network fighting the Ottomans, but they were exposed in 1917 and only escaped from the genocide that Ottoman Armenians, Greeks and Assyrians endured due to political intervention from Germany and Vatican. Despite this, the Tel Aviv and Jaffa deportation, issued by Djemal Pasha in 1917 in retaliation to the Jewish spy ring, was the final string of this hostility, during which thousands of Jews were killed, has continued to weigh influence on the modern Israeli–Turkish relations as well as Israel's relations with Turkic world.


== Diplomacy timeline ==


=== Initial contact ===

Although it had voted against the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine, Turkey recognized the State of Israel in 1949. Turkey's first diplomatic mission in Israel was a "Legation" and was officially inaugurated on 7 January 1950 and the first Turkish Chief of Mission, Seyfullah Esin presented his credentials to Chaim Weizmann, President of Israel. However, the Turkish Legation was downgraded to the level of "Charge d’Affaires" after the Suez Canal Crisis on 26 November 1956.
In 1958, Israeli prime minister David Ben-Gurion and Turkish prime minister Adnan Menderes met secretly to discuss a "peripheral pact" which included public-relations campaigns, exchange of intelligence information and military support. In 1967, Turkey joined the Arab condemnation of Israel after the Six-Day War and called for Israel's withdrawal from the occupied territories but abstained from voting in favor of a clause referring to Israel as an "aggressor state." At a meeting of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in Rabat, Morocco, Turkey opposed a resolution calling for severing diplomatic relations with Israel.
As a result of positive developments in bilateral ties, the Turkish mission in Tel-Aviv was upgraded back to the level of "Legation" in July 1963 and further upgraded to the level of "Embassy" as of January 1980.
Upon Israel's annexation of East Jerusalem and enunciation of Jerusalem as its eternal capital, the representation was relegated to the level of "Second Secretary" on 30 November 1980.


=== During the 1990s ===
The positive atmosphere in the Israeli–Palestinian peace process in the early 1990s made it possible to raise the mutual diplomatic relations once again to Ambassadorial level and a Turkish Ambassador presented his credentials to President Chaim Herzog, on 23 March 1992, in Tel Aviv.
Israel has maintained two diplomatic missions in Turkey: its embassy is located in the capital city of Ankara, and its Consulate General is located in Turkey's largest city, Istanbul. Until the recent downgrading in relations, the Israeli ambassador to Turkey was Gabby Levy, and the Israeli consul-general was Mordechai Amihai. These missions are responsible for Israeli consular affairs for the Marmara, Aegean, Eastern Thrace and western part of the Black Sea regions of Turkey.


=== Post-AKP ascendancy ===
In Turkey's 2002 election, the Justice and Development Party, also known as AKP, won a landslide victory. Prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan visited Israel in 2005 offering to serve as a Middle East peace mediator and looking to build up trade and military ties. Erdoğan brought a large group of businessmen on his two-day trip, which included talks with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and President Moshe Katsav. Erdoğan also laid a wreath at the Holocaust memorial, Yad Vashem. Erdoğan told Sharon that his Justice and Development Party regarded anti-Semitism as "a crime against humanity". He added that Iran's nuclear ambitions were a threat not just to Israel but to "the entire world".
In early 2006, the Israeli Foreign Ministry described its country's relations with Turkey as "perfect". A joint Israeli-Palestinian industrial park was being developed under Turkey's aegis. Israeli President Shimon Peres and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas addressed the Grand National Assembly of Turkey a day apart. Peres described Turkey as an "important player in the Middle East in relation to the United States, Syria and the Palestinians, as well as us". According to a report in the Jerusalem Post, a spokeswoman for the Syrian Foreign Ministry said that Turkey was serving as a "channel of communication" between Syria and Israel.
On a three-day visit to Ankara in November 2007, Peres met with Turkish President Abdullah Gül and addressed the Grand National Assembly of Turkey. Gül promised to help free three abducted Israeli soldiers: Gilad Shalit, Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev.


==== Diplomatic spats ====
The Turkish government's condemnation of the 2008–2009 Israel–Gaza conflict strained relations between the two countries. In December 1987, Turkey had already declared support for the Palestinians' right to self-determination. In 2004, Turkey had denounced Israeli assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin. It described Israeli policy in the Gaza Strip as "state-sponsored terrorism". There were demonstrations across Turkey against Israeli actions in Gaza.
On 5 March 2009, the Israeli daily newspaper Haaretz reported that "secret reconciliation talks at the highest level" had been held to get the Israeli-Turkish relations back on track. This report was cited in the Turkish press.
On 11 October 2009, a military aerial exercise was to consist of Turkey, Israel, the United States, and Italy. However, Turkey barred Israel from the Anatolian Eagle military exercise.
In October 2009, following Turkey's banning Israel's participation in the Anatolian Eagle military exercise, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu objected to Turkey as a mediator, stating "Turkey can't be [an] honest broker", between Syria and Israel.

Erdoğan harshly criticized Israel's conduct in Gaza at the World Economic Forum conference in Davos, Switzerland in January 2009. After the assembled audience applauded Peres, Erdoğan said: "I find it very sad that people applaud what you said. You killed people. And I think that it is very wrong." The moderator, Washington Post columnist David Ignatius asked Erdoğan to finish, saying that people needed to go to dinner. Erdoğan complained about the fact, that he was given 12 minutes to talk, whereas Peres talked for a duration of 25 minutes. Erdoğan then proceeded to leave the stage.
In October 2009, Ayrılık, a prime-time serial on Turkish state television channel TRT 1 featured fictionalized scenes of Israeli soldiers shooting Palestinian children and mistreating elderly Arabs. Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman criticized the program, and rebuked the Turkish Ambassador in front of assembled media. Lieberman subsequently apologized after Turkey threatened to withdraw its ambassador.
After Hamas leader Khaled Mashal paid an official visit to Turkey, relations began to cool off. In January 2010, Israel protested when an episode ("Ambush") of the Turkish soap opera Valley of the Wolves depicted Israeli intelligence spying inside Turkey and kidnapping Turkish babies. The series depicted a fictional Mossad attack on the Turkish embassy in Tel Aviv in which the ambassador and his family are taken hostage. On 11 January 2010, Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon met with Turkish ambassador Ahmet Oğuz Çelikkol, who was seated on a stool that was lower than Ayalon's. Ayalon allegedly turned to his aide and quipped, "The main thing is that you see that he is seated low and that we are high ... that there is one flag on the table (the Israeli flag) and that we are not smiling."
Moshe Ya'alon, Israel's Minister of Strategic Affairs, accused Turkey of cooperating with Hamas and Iran. According to the Shin Bet, Hamas established a command post in Turkey and has used it to recruit operatives and oversee operations in the Middle East. David Ignatius has reported that in 2012, Turkey revealed the names of Mossad agents to Iran.


==== 2010 Gaza flotilla raid ====

On 31 May 2010, nine activists (eight Turkish citizens and one Turkish-American with dual citizenship) were killed and many more wounded by Israeli troops and seven Israeli soldiers were injured on the Mavi Marmara, part of the "Gaza Freedom Flotilla", a convoy of six ships carrying 663 people from 37 nations, including pro-Palestinian activists. Following the raid, which took place in the Mediterranean Sea in international waters, tension between the two countries mounted. One of the ships taking part was flying a Turkish flag. Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan described the raid as "state terrorism". Turkey recalled its ambassador from Israel, and summoned the Israeli ambassador to demand an explanation. The Turkish Foreign Ministry stated that the incident could lead to irreparable consequences in bilateral relations.
On 2 September 2011, Turkey downgraded diplomatic ties with Israel and suspended military co-operation after the UN released its report of the Mavi Marmara raid. A statement from the Israeli prime minister's office said, "Israel hopes to find a way to overcome the dispute and will continue to work towards this goal". Turkey demanded an Israeli apology and compensation over 31 May 2010 incident aboard the Mavi Marmara in which eight Turkish nationals and an American man of Turkish descent died when the vessel was stormed by Israeli commandos. The Israeli government refused to give one.
In September 2011, Turkey expelled Israel's ambassador after a UN report found that the blockade of Gaza was legal according to international law although excessive force was used when boarding the ship. Israeli officials stated that they hoped to restore ties but reiterated that they would not apologize. Hamas praised Turkey's decision.
Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, Turkey's opposition leader, condemned the downgrade in relations with Israel, stating "No good can come of it and there is no need for us to risk our interest with petty action." Faruk Logoglu, a deputy chairman of the opposition Republican People's Party, criticized Erdoğan, stating that "The probability that (Turkey's ruling) party has carried Turkey to the brink of a hot conflict is saddening and unacceptable." Alon Liel, a former Israeli ambassador to Turkey, stated that it was unlikely that Turkish forces would penetrate Israeli waters, but speculated that Turkey might to disrupt future Israeli gas exports to Cyprus and warned of a new Turkish-Egyptian alliance that could isolate Israel in the Mediterranean.
Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak predicted that the rift would pass in time. At the U.N. General Assembly in September 2011, U.S. President Barack Obama asked Erdoğan to resolve the crisis with Israel.


==== Deterioration of ties ====
The Turkish Foreign Ministry called on the international community and the United Nations to take the necessary initiatives to stop Israel's military operation in Gaza on late 2012, which it described as another example of Israel's hostile policies. Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu see in this attack another of Israel's "crimes of humanity". Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan accused the United Nations on 19 November of failing to act over the deadly Israeli air bombardments of Gaza, calling Israel a "terrorist state" that "massacres innocent children".
During his speech in Vienna on 1 March 2013 at a United Nations event, Turkish Prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan devoted to dialogue between the West and Islam, decrying the rising racism in Europe and the fact that many Muslims "who live in countries other than their own" often face harsh discrimination. Erdoğan described Zionism as "a crime against humanity" saying, "It is necessary that we must consider—just like Zionism, or anti-Semitism, or fascism—Islamophobia." In an interview to the Euronews, Shimon Peres argued that Erdoğan's statements are based on ignorance and they raise the flames of hatred. On 20 March, Erdoğan began an official visit to Denmark with an effort to clarify his remarks he made on 27 February at a UN conference in Vienna referring to Zionism as a crime against humanity. "Let no one misunderstand what I said. Everyone knows that my criticism [of Israel] focuses on some critical issues. It's directed especially toward Israeli policies on Gaza," Erdoğan said in an interview with Politiken, a Danish newspaper. Erdoğan claimed his February comments were not anti-Semitic but rather a criticism of Israel's policies.


==== Reconciliation attempts ====

On 22 March 2013, Netanyahu called Erdoğan and apologized for the Gaza Flotilla incident. In an official statement the Israeli government  expressed regret over deterioration in bilateral relations and described the incident as unintentional, regretful and marred by "operational errors". Erdoğan later issued a statement accepting the apology on behalf of the Turkish people. Israel also said it would compensate the victims' families. Israel initially declared that the countries had agreed to restore normal diplomatic relations, including the return of ambassadors and cancellation of Turkish legal proceedings in absentia against Israeli troops involved in the raid, but this statement was later omitted.
U.S. President Barack Obama, whose visit to Israel coincided with these events and was credited with brokering the reconciliation, said that the U.S. "attached great importance to the restoration of positive relations between [Israel and Turkey] in order to advance regional peace and security".


==== Further tension ====
In August 2013, Erdoğan told AKP's provincial chairs that Israel was responsible for the July 2013 overthrow of Mohamed Morsi in Egypt. He based this claim on a video posted by Tzipi Livni speaking to French intellectual Bernard-Henri Levy during which Levy said: "The Muslim Brotherhood will not be in power even if they win the elections, because democracy is not the ballot box." However, according to Hürriyet, Levy actually said: "If the Muslim Brotherhood arrives in Egypt, I will not say democracy wants it, so let democracy progress. Democracy is not only elections, it is also values...I will urge the prevention of [the Muslim Brotherhood] coming to power, but by all sorts of means."
The Israeli Foreign Ministry stated that Erdoğan's accusation was "a statement well worth not commenting on". Egypt's interim government rejected Erdoğan's claim, describing it as "baseless", "very bewildering", and charged that "its purpose [was] to strike at the unity of Egyptians".
With the scandal over alleged Turkish involvement in exposure of Israeli special agents in Iran in October 2013, the relations between Israel and Turkey declined further.


==== Renormalization (2015–present) ====
In December 2015, Turkey and Israel began talks to restore diplomatic ties; however disagreements between the sides continue.


==== Reconciliation agreement ====

A reconciliation agreement was announced on 27 June 2016 to end the six-year rift in the relation between both countries.

The Turkish Parliament will pass a law canceling all appeals against Israeli soldiers involved in the killing of nine Turkish citizens during the Gaza flotilla raid and will also block any future claims.
Commitment to stop terrorist or military activity against Israel on Turkish soil including funding and aid to such activities from Turkey. Palestinian movement Hamas will be allowed to operate on Turkish soil but only as a political movement.
Turkey will accept to send all aid to the Gaza Strip through Israel and then from Israel to Gaza on land.
Israel will allow Turkey to advance humanitarian projects in the Gaza Strip, such as building an hospital, power station and a desalination station, all subjected to Israeli security considerations
Israel will give $20 million as compensation for the families of those who died and were injured in the raid. The money will be transferred through a humanitarian fund in Turkey. An Israel official said the money will be transferred only after the Turkish parliament will pass the law renouncing all appealings against Israeli soldiers involved in the incident.
The two countries will start a process of renormalizing their relations, reappointing ambassadors to Ankara and Tel Aviv and ending all sanctions between the two.
The agreement was approved by the Israeli security cabinet by a vote of 7–3 on 29 June.
The agreement was then approved by the Turkish parliament on 20 August 2016. Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan then signed the agreement on 31 August.
On 7 October, Turkey named foreign policy expert Kemal Ökem as ambassador to Israel. Israel's decision to name an ambassador was later postponed.
On 15 November, Israel named Eitan Na'eh as ambassador to Turkey. In a reciprocal move, Erdoğan confirmed on 16 November the nomination of Kemal Ökem as Turkish ambassador to Israel. Na'eh arrived in Ankara on 31 November. Turkey also agreed to drop charges against four Israeli soldiers on 8 December. On 12 December, Ökem arrived in Jerusalem.


==== Libya–Turkey maritime deal, EastMed pipeline, and Bat Galim incident ====

Following the December 2019 deal between the Tripoli faction in the Second Libyan Civil War and Turkey that allowed for the deployment of Turkish ground troops in Libya and the declared Turkey's sea borders to stretch from Anatolia all the way to the shores of Derna and Tobruk, foreign minister Israel Katz announced Israel's opposition to the maritime border accord between Ankara and Tripoli, and confirmed that the deal was "illegal" according to the Israeli official position, while at the same time noting that Israel does not want a conflict with Turkey.
Earlier in the month, the Turkish navy had driven out an Israeli oceanographic research vessel that had been operating with the consent of the Cypriot government in Cypriot waters. This act, in the context of the deal with the GNA, led to Israeli fears that Turkey aimed to "create a sea border the width of the entire Mediterranean" and cut off Israeli access international waters via the Mediterranean sea, the channel of 99% of Israeli exports. Energy expert Brenda Schaffer interprets the EastMed pipeline between Israel, Cyprus, and Greece (forecasted to be able to cater to 10% of Europe's gas needs, and decrease reliance on Russia) as a joint attempt to exclude Turkey from the "Club Med" gas club, but the decision to sign the deal was stated to be a response to the Turkish-Libyan deal.


==== Yossi Cohen's remark, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, and rise of anti-Turkish coalition ====
In August 2020, Mossad's chief Yossi Cohen had openly named Turkey as a new threat for the peace of the region, and even further single out a number of allies Turkey would gain potential support like Azerbaijan and Qatar, the former has strong relations with Israel since 1990s. His remark was considered as a major move by Israel to openly confront the Turkish government.
Israel's decision to normalize relations with Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates via Abraham Accords had further worsened its relations with Turkey, as Ankara openly accused the two Arab nations of complicit on supporting Israel against Palestinians. In response, Turkey hosted two Hamas leaders, a move which triggered condemnation from Israel and the United States.
During the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, Israel openly supported Azerbaijan, an ally of Turkey and Israel. However, after Turkey blamed Israel for destabilization in the Caucasus, Israeli Defense Minister Benny Gantz accused Turkey of inflaming war in the region. Israel had also considered suspending support for Azerbaijan as a retaliation.
Following the end of Karabakh conflict, Yaakov Amidror, a retired major general who spent more than 30 years in senior positions in the Israel Defense Forces and government, for the first time stated that Turkish political influence in Azerbaijan is now representing as a threat to Israel due to Turkey's recent open opposition to Azerbaijan's good relations with Israel and Turkey's strong political, economic and cultural tie with Azerbaijan. He also stated that Israel has no intention on who is to control Karabakh, but rather only wish to express better relations with Baku since Azerbaijan is one of the only few Muslim nations to recognize Israel. Previously, Turkish ambassador in 2011 had urged Azerbaijan to sever relations with Israel.


==== France–Muslim world tensions ====
Turkish President Erdoğan, following French President Emmanuel Macron's statement about Islam, has compared the situation of Muslims in Europe today to the Jews in World War II. This statement was condemned in Israel, who pointed out the Turkish government's absence on voicing solidarity following the murder of French teacher Samuel Paty, as well as accusing Turkish government of hyping the situation and signal the differences between Nazi policy in World War II and French struggle against Islamic extremism. A Pakistani journalist working for Haaretz, Kunwar Khuldune Shahid, has pointed out that the Turkish government is openly glorifying mass killings on non-Muslims while trying to create blasphemy and hypocrisies throughout abusing the Holocaust for its political gains.


==== Turkish support for Hamas ====

Hamas is receiving diplomatic support from Turkey and the Hamas delegations in 2019 and 2020 hosted in Turkey. In addition, according to reports Saleh al-Arouri, a top Hamas official, is living in Turkey for many years. Israeli media also reported that Hamas planned attacks against Israel from Turkey, including kidnappings in 2014. In 2020, according to Israeli diplomats Turkey gave  passports and identity cards to Hamas members in Istanbul.


==== 2021 Israel–Palestine crisis ====
During the 2021 Israel–Palestine crisis, Turkey accused Israel for the violence. The Turkish president called Israel a terror state and said that Turkey took initiatives to make international institutions to take action.
In addition, the Turkish Foreign Minister said during his speech at the United Nations General Assembly that Israel is the sole responsible for the violence and must held accountable for its crimes. In another speech at the United Nations Human Rights Council, he said that Israel's actions are "crimes against humanity".
In an emergency meeting of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, Turkey proposed an "international protection mechanism", including the deploy of a military force, for the protection of the Palestinians. 
The Turkey's vice president Fuat Oktay said that the Muslim countries should act and take a clear stance.
During a phone call with the Russian President Vladimir Putin, the Turkish President told him that the international community should “give Israel a strong and deterrent lesson.” In another call, the Turkish President asked the Pope Francis to support sanctions against Israel. The Turkish president also talked with King Abdullah of Jordan, and called for Turkey and Jordan to work together to stop Israel's attacks on Palestine. Furthermore, Erdoğan spoke to the phone with the Emir of Kuwait Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and the Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh. While the Turkish Foreign Minister talked in the phone with his counterparts from Iran, Algeria, Pakistan and Russia.
Thousands of protesters demonstrated in Turkish cities against Israel, despite a full lock down in the country due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Turkish National Security Council condemned the occupation of Palestinian lands by Israel and attacks against Palestinians.


==== Rapprochement ====
In a sign of warming ties, Israeli President Isaac Herzog visited Turkey to meet with Erdoğan in March 2022. On 17 August 2022, the office of Israeli Prime Minister Yair Lapid announced that Israel and Turkey had decided to restore full diplomatic ties and will return ambassadors to each other's country. In September 2022, Lapid and Turkish President Erdoğan met in the United Nations General Assembly in New York. It was the first meeting between Israel's prime minister and Turkey's president in 14 years, meaning a sign of warming ties between the countries.


==== 2023 Gaza war and spillover ====
Following the start of the Gaza war, at an AK Party congress in Ankara, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan called on Israelis and Palestinians to act with restraint and refrain from hostile acts that could exacerbate the situation. On 11 October, Erdoğan called the Israeli blockade and bombing of Gaza as a massacre and offered Turkish mediation in the war. On 25 October, he condemned the civilian deaths caused by Hamas's attack, but he also mentioned that Hamas is not a terrorist organization but a liberation group fighting to protect its lands and people. Nationalist Movement Party's leader Devlet Bahçeli called for a trial at the International Court of Justice against Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
In November 2023, the Turkish President called Israel a "terrorist state" and accused it of committing genocide against the Palestinians, adding that Turkey will take steps to ensure that the Israeli settlers will be recognised as terrorists. In return, Netanyahu and Israeli Foreign Minister Eli Cohen responded that Turkey hosts and encourages terrorist organizations, such as Hamas, and that Turkish forces have "shelled villages in Turkey" and shouldn't preach Israel. Turkey, in an official response, dismissed the accusations as unfounded. Some days later, Erdogan said that Israel is committing a crime against humanity and genocide, adding that Turkey, along with the support of over 2,000 lawyers, will file a legal complaint against Israel. In addition, he said that due to Turkey's efforts, during the Riyadh summit, there were important steps towards the designation of the Israeli settlers as terrorists, and that Turkey will keep Israel's nuclear weapons issue on the world's agenda. Furthermore, he added that Israel's operation in Gaza is as brutal as the crusader's occupation and World War II and that Israel is "openly committing war crimes".
In a phone call with Iran's president, Ebrahim Raisi, Erdoğan talked about the importance of a unified stance from the Islamic world against the Israeli brutality. On 28 October 2023, Israel withdrew its diplomats from Turkey to reassess the relations between the two countries, according to a statement by Israel's foreign minister Eli Cohen. This move came in the aftermath of comments by Erdoğan, accusing Israel of war crimes in the occupied Palestinian Territories. Turkish and Israeli politicians were arguing and "fighting" on social media throughout this period.
In February 2024,