Symposium: Heuristics of Discovery
https://doi.org/10.6092/issn.1971-8853/8350
Sociologica. V.12 N.1 (2018)
ISSN 1971-8853
Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: The Fabrication of Serendipity*
Johannes F.K. Schmidt
Published: July 26, 2018
Johannes F.K. Schmidt: Bielefeld University (Germany)
johannes.schmidt@uni-bielefeld.de; http://ekvv.uni-bielefeld.de/pers_publ/publ/PersonDetail.jsp?personId=
25653450
Dipl.-Soz. Johannes F.K. Schmidt is the scientific coordinator of the long term research project “Niklas Luhmann —
A Passion for Theory” (2015–2030) at the Bielefeld University (https://www.uni-bielefeld.de/soz/luhmann-archiv/).
The objective of this project is to preserve Niklas Luhmann’s literary estate and make it accessible for research. In the
lastyearshepublishedseveralarticlesaboutLuhmann’sliteraryestateandeditedthefirstversionofLuhmann’slifelong
project of a theory of society (Systemtheorie der Gesellschaft, 2017. Berlin: Suhrkamp).
* The following article is a revised and shortened version of: Schmidt, J.F.K. (2016). Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: Think-
ing Tool, Communication Partner, Publication Machine. In A. Cevolini (Ed.), Forgetting Machines: Knowledge Management
Evolution in Early Modern Europe (pp. 289–311). Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Copyright © 2018 Johannes F.K. Schmidt
The text in this work is licensed under the Creative Commons BY License.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
53


Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: The Fabrication of Serendipity
Sociologica. V.12 N.1 (2018)
1
The Sociology of Niklas Luhmann
Niklas Luhmann (1927–1998), Professor of Sociology at the Bielefeld University from 1968 to 1993, was
one of the last advocates of a so called “grand theory”: Over the course of his forty years of academic work,
he developed a universal theoretical framework — i.e. sociological systems theory — capable of covering
nearly the entire spectrum of social phenomena. In doing so, he placed great emphasis on conceptual
and terminological consistency and was receptive to theoretical developments not only in sociology but in
other academic disciplines such as philosophy, law, theology, biology and cybernetics in particular. Since
the 1960s, Luhmann published a bewildering wealth of articles and books year after year and at the time
of his death, his list of publications comprised more than 500 titles on diverse topics, mostly part of his
central research interest: a theory of society.1
Luhmann studied law from 1946 to 1949 and then first worked as a senior civil servant in public ad-
ministration. In the mid 1950s, before he had any institutional affiliation with academia, he was already
conscious of the fact that the notes he took from his readings at the time,2 would not be collected for a
limited publication project but for a far more extensive endeavour, eventually for a lifelong project. The
shortcomings of the common methods of organizing notes by collecting them in folders motivated him
early on to start a card-based filing system.3 In organizing his research in this way, Luhmann adopted a
system of organizing knowledge that had emerged in the wake of early modern scholarship along with
the rapidly growing number of available publications since the Sixteenth century and the practice of ex-
cerpting that followed: card indexing.4 He went on to develop the potential for systematic knowledge
production inherent in this filing technique to perfection by devising a very specific system of organiza-
tion and referencing which seems to be an analogical pre-adaptive advance of the modern form of digital
database. Luhmann’s card index allows the production of new and often unexpected knowledge by relat-
ing concepts and thoughts that do not have much in common at first sight: One could say that it makes —
to use Robert Merton’s term5 — serendipity possible in a systemically and theoretically informed way.
2
Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index
Luhmann’s card index consists of approximately 90,000 handwritten cards in A-6 format organized in
two collections. The first collection, approximately created between 1951 and 1962, a time when Luhmann
was on his way from a legal expert with interests especially in constitutional law and administrative sci-
ences to a systems theoretical sociologist, is based primarily on his readings in political science, adminis-
trative studies, organization theory, philosophy, and sociology. It consists of approximately 23,000 cards,
which are divided into 108 sections by subjects and numbered consecutively, two bibliographies compris-
ing about 2,000 titles, and a keyword index with roughly 1,250 entries. The second collection (1963–1997),
now clearly reflecting a sociological approach,6 is divided into eleven top-level sections with a total of about
100 subsections. It consists of approximately 67,000 cards, including a sizeable but obviously incomplete
bibliographical apparatus with roughly 15,000 references and a keyword index with 3,200 entries.
1.
Since 1999 a number of more recent monographs and articles have been published posthumously. There are still about 150
other yet unpublished manuscripts in his literary estate which is now being prepared to make it accessible for research (cf.
https://www.uni-bielefeld.de/soz/luhmann-archiv/).
2.
In the early 1950s, during his legal clerkship, he was working on his doctoral thesis in law, which he had largely completed in
1955 but did not submit.
3.
The following remarks are based on a first insight into Niklas Luhmann’s card index which is a central part of his literary
estate. The first part of the card index is now online: http://ds.ub.uni-bielefeld.de/viewer/ppnresolver?id=ZKLuhm. During
his lifetime Luhmann himself had published a rudimentary description of its construction principles and how he used it
(Luhmann, 1981); in an interview one can find a few remarks concerning the genesis of the collection (Luhmann, 1987).
4.
Cf. Cevolini, 2004; Krajewski, 2011.
5.
See Merton & Barber, 2004 (1945).
6.
In 1960–1961, Luhmann spent a year at the Harvard School of Public Administration in Cambridge, MA (USA), where he
attended lectures by Talcott Parsons, the leading sociologist in the field of systems theory at the time. There are no docu-
ments in the literary estate substantiating the claim that this visit was the trigger to start a new collection of notes, but the
chronological sequence seems obvious.
https://doi.org/10.6092/issn.1971-8853/8350
54


Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: The Fabrication of Serendipity
Sociologica. V.12 N.1 (2018)
The bulk of the collections (approximately 75,000 cards) consist of notes documenting the results of
Luhmann’s readings, but also his own thoughts and theoretical arguments and concepts. The notes re-
sulting from his readings are not simply excerpts; what mattered to him was “what could be utilized in
which way for the cards that had already been written. Hence, when reading, I always have the question
in mind of how the books can be integrated into the filing system.”7 As a consequence he normally did
not put the notes made during reading directly into the collection, nor did he file them in exactly the same
way that he had taken them while reading; in fact in the evening he transferred the often only rudimentary
records he made during the day into new notes according to his special filing technique. Furthermore his
main concern was not to develop an idea to maximum sophistication before including the note into the
collection; rather, he operated on the assumption that a decision on the usefulness of a note could only
be made in relating it to the other notes — and therefore would (in many cases) be a matter to be decided
in the future: by re-reading the note in the context of new notes compiled afterwards or in the context
of an inquiry, i.e. in using the card index as a database for new thoughts and publications. Furthermore,
this being the case, it was not clear right from the beginning where the note to be added would be inserted
into the collection — this was a decision that was made in the course of preparing the respective note for
filing; and normally there was more than one possible solution to the question where to place the note in
the collection due to the specific structure of the collection.
These issues draw the attention to the four special characteristics of the ﬁle collection which are the pre-
requisitesforitsmainfunctionofproducingnewknowledge: aspecificsystemoforganizationandmethod
of card integration with specific rules of numbering, an internal system of linking, and a comprehensive
keyword index. All this together make Luhmann’s card index a complex cognitive system with a creativity
of its own, a “second memory” as he called it. This ability was not totally independent from its creator of
course, but it was leading systematically to ideas that do not lie at hand — even surprising the person who
was the author of cards. Without doubt there was a personal unity between the author and the reader of
the notes, but on the other hand there was a difference between these two insofar as the factual complexity
and the evolutionary history of the collection intervened.
3
The Method of Card Integraঞon
According to Luhmann the collection is a “combination of disorder and order, of clustering and unpre-
dictable combinations emerging from ad hoc selection.”8 Of course the file collection is not simply a
chaotic compilation of notes but an aggregation of a vast number of cards on specific concepts and topics.
This order per subject area on a top level is reflected in the first number assigned to the card followed by
a comma (first collection) or slash (second collection) that separates it from the rest of the number given
each card (see below). The first collection features 108 sections differentiated by subject areas, exploring
and reflecting on largely predetermined, fairly detailed fields of knowledge in law, administrative sciences,
philosophy and sociology, such as state, equality, planning, power, constitution, revolution, hierarchy,
science, role, concept of world, information, and so on. The second collection, by design, is quite more
problem-oriented, reflecting the emerging sociological interests of Luhmann: It consists of only eleven
top-level subject areas: organizational theory, functionalism, decision theory, office, formal/informal or-
der, sovereignty/state, individual concepts/individual problems, economy, ad hoc notes, archaic societies,
advanced civilizations. What this compilation immediately illustrates is that it is not a system of order in
the sense of an established taxonomy but a historical product of Luhmann’s reading and research interests
especially in the 1960s.9 Following the subject areas defined at the top level are other subsections that re-
volve around a variety of topics. The relationship between the top-level subject area and the lower-level
7.
Luhmann, 1987, p. 150 (my translation).
8.
Luhmann, index card no. 9/8 of the second collection (my translation). In the second collection one can find a small subsec-
tion with notes about the card index and its principles.
9.
In the literary estate we found a paper with a table of contents for a publication called “Grundriss einer funktionalen Verwal-
tungslehre” (“Outline of a Functional Administrative Theory”). Beside this note there are no other documents which suggest
that Luhmann ever really tried to write this book, but the bullets of the elaborate table of contents can be found in the first
six subject areas of the second collection of the card index mentioned above. So it might be only a little exaggeration to say
that the overall structure of this collection originally is developed “out of the spirit of the administrative sciences.”
https://doi.org/10.6092/issn.1971-8853/8350
55


Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: The Fabrication of Serendipity
Sociologica. V.12 N.1 (2018)
subjects cannot be described in terms of a strictly hierarchical order, it is rather a form of loose coupling
insofar as one can find lower-level subjects which do not fit systematically to the top-level issue but show
only marginally connections.
This is a result of the specific system of organization of the notes applied within these sections on a
particular subject matter which ensures that the initial decision for a specific topic did not lead to a se-
quence of cards confined to that one topic: Whenever Luhmann came across an interesting idea about a
secondary aspect on one of his cards, he pursued this idea by adding additional notes and inserted the re-
spective card at that place in the existing sequence of cards. This method could be applied again to the card
that had been inserted and so forth, the result being a sequence of cards leading thematically and conceptu-
ally farther and farther away from the initial subject and constitute their on subsection. Furthermore this
technique enabled the collection not only to grow in absolute numbers, but to grow “inwardly” without
the limitations of a systematically order.10
But the positioning of larger subject areas as well as individual cards in the collection was not only the
historical product of Luhmann’s reading interests and note-taking activities. It also owed to the difficulty
of assigning an issue to one and only one single (top-level) subject, which is a matter of ambiguity or so
to say conceptual indecisiveness. Luhmann solved this problem by seizing it as an opportunity: instead of
subscribing to the idea of a systematic classification system, he opted for organizing entries based on the
principle that they must have only some relation to the previous entry without also having to keep some
overarching system in mind. One could say: there must be a local solution (i.e. connection or internal fit)
only. This indicates, accordingly, that thepositioning ofa specialsubject withinthis systemof organization
reveals nothing about its theoretical importance — for there are no privileged positions in this web of notes:
there is no top and no bottom.
Thedecision inherent in this filing technique without a fixed system of order is an essential prerequisite
of the creativity of the filing system. In explaining his approach, Luhmann emphasized, with the first steps
of computer technology in mind, the benefits of the principle of “multiple storage”: in the card index it
serves to provide different avenues of accessing a topic or concept since the respective notes may be filed
in different places and different contexts. Conversely, embedding a topic in various contexts gives rise to
different lines of information by means of opening up different realms of comparison in each case due to
thefactthatanoteisaninformationonlyinawebofothernotes. FurthermoreitwasLuhmann’sintention
to “avoid premature systematization and closure and maintain openness toward the future.”11 His way of
organizing the collection allows for it to continuously adapt to the evolution of his thinking and his overall
theory which as well is not conceptualized in a hierarchical manner but rather in a cybernetical way in
which every term or theoretical concept is dependent on the other.
4
The System of Numbering
Getting the filing system “to speak” requires an additional prerequisite: the possibility of addressing each
card individually and hence also of finding it again. Thus, the filing technique does not build on the idea
of an order of contents in the first place, but of a fixed order of positioning. This idea is at the root of
Luhmann’s specific notational system: Each card is assigned a number and, thus, a fixed position in the
file that does not change over time: card 1/1 (or 1,1, as in the first collection) — i.e. the first note in the first
section of the collection — is followed by 1/2 (or 1,2), and so on; a card that was created later and pursues
an aspect further that is noted on card 1/1 but is not part of the argument followed up on card 1/2 was given
the number 1/1a, because the number 1/2 was already assigned, and inserted between card 1/1 and 1/2; at
that point, either a card 1/1b on that very same topic could be added or another card 1/1a1 breaking things
down further or pursuing other aspects, which would then be inserted between 1/1a and 1/1b, and so forth.
10.
For instance, when we look up the section “functionalism”, one find the following sequence of terms: concept of function
– unit of reference of functional analysis – concept of conditions for continued existence – concept of functional problem –
concept of expectations – social identity – sincerity – secret (all my translations).
11.
Luhmann, index card no. 9/8h in the second collection (my translation).
https://doi.org/10.6092/issn.1971-8853/8350
56


Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: The Fabrication of Serendipity
Sociologica. V.12 N.1 (2018)
4.1
Illustraࢼon of the Method of Card Integraࢼon and Numbering
1/1 Card with notes referring to a certain topic
1/1a Card containing notes referring to a particular idea from card 1/1
1/1b Continuation of notes from card 1/1a
1/1b1 Card containing notes referring to a particular idea from card 1/1b
1/1b1a Card containing notes referring to a particular idea from card 1/1b1
1/1b1b Continuation of notes from card 1/1b1a
1/1b2 Continuation of notes from card 1/1b1
1/1c Continuation of notes from card 1/1b
1/2 Continuation of notes from card 1/1
In conjunction with the method of card integration outlined above, this rather simple but ingenious
numbering system12 based on the principle of connectivity of arguments results in a complex num-
bering structure and in cards that bear a combination of numbers and letters with up to 13 digits (e.g.,
21/3a1p5c4fB1a on the first card of the subsection “Confidentiality” in the second collection) and thus
allows to organize a complex process of inserting a nearly infinite number of cards between what had
initially been two consecutive cards created at the same time on a related subject. The numbering structure
thus reflects the unique depth of the organization of cards that Luhmann referred to as a “capacity for
internal ramifications.”13
5
The System of Linking
In addition to the notation and numbering system, there is another key feature of the collections that ac-
counts for the creativity of this filing system: a system of referencing or linking. That means that Luhmann
on one card noted a number of another card, often thematically and spatial far away, relating the different
cards in a specific way. An estimate based on a sample count suggests that the first collection contains ap-
proximately 20,000 references and the second about 30,000 references of this kind, that means that there is
a reference link on nearly every (first collection) or nearly every second note (second collection) on average.
Three types of linking can be distinguished:
a) References in the context of a larger structural outline: When beginning a major line of thought
Luhmann sometimes noted on the first card several of the aspects to be addressed and marked them
by a capital letter that referred to a card (or set of consecutive cards) that was numbered accordingly
and placed at least in relative proximity to the card containing the outline. This structure comes
closest to resembling the outline of an article or the table of contents of a book and therefore doesn’t
really use the potentials of the collection as a web of notes.
b) Collective references: At the beginning of a section devoted to a specific subject area, one can often
find a card that refers to a number of other cards in the collection that have some connection with
the subject or concept addressed in that section. A card of this kind can list up to 25 references and
will typically specify the respective subject or concept in addition to the number. These references
can indicate cards that are related by subject matter and in close proximity or to cards that are far
apart in other sections of the collection, the latter being the normal case.
c) Single references: At a particular place in a normal note Luhmann often made a reference to another
card in the collection that was also relevant to the special argument in question; in most cases the re-
12.
Ican’tgointotoomuchdetailhereduetothelimitationofspace: Theillustrationaboveisofcourseanidealization. Normally
the numbering alternates between numbers and letters, but that was a rule Luhmann sometimes violates (due to an additional
insertion of a branch off-card in an existing sequence where the alternation already had taken place); furthermore there was
no general rule that the main line of argument is numbered consecutively in numbers or letters, i.e. a sequence 1 – 1a – 1b of
mono-thematic cards was also possible. That means that the number on its own does not really inform about the relations
between different notes. An exception from this is Luhmann’s use of capital letters (see below).
13.
Luhmann, 1981, p. 224 (my translation of “innere Verzweigungsfähigkeit”).
https://doi.org/10.6092/issn.1971-8853/8350
57


Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: The Fabrication of Serendipity
Sociologica. V.12 N.1 (2018)
ferred card is located at an entirely different place in the file, frequently in the context of a completely
different discussion or subject.
Often Luhmann noted the references directly as he created the card but also regularly updated already
existing cards by adding references whenever the integration of new cards in other parts of the collection
made it necessary. Thus the advantages of the mode of organizing the collection — “The decision where
to place what in the file can involve a great deal of randomness as long as I add references linking the other
options”14 — necessitate a permanently data bank update. In this way, Luhmann engaged in an ongoing
process of tending to his file, which explains why the file, according to him, preoccupied so much of his
time and also illustrates how well he really knew it.15
Generally speaking, his mode of referencing — developed in the 1950s! — make use of an idea that
wouldlaterbecomethecommontechnologyof“hyperlinks”inthecomputerage. Luhmannhimselfcalled
his system of references a “web-like system.”16 The metaphor of the web also suggests interpreting it along
network-theoretical lines.17 A key feature explaining the production of serendipity is the potential of the
filing system for enabling so-called “short cuts”, i.e., the fact that a reference may lead to a completely
different (both in terms of subject and location), distant region in the network (file). The cards containing
a collection of references are furthermore of interest because they represent so-called “hubs”, i.e., cards
that function as nodes that feature an above-average number of links to other cards so that these few cards
provide access points to extensive parts of the file.
The significance of Luhmann’s system of referencing cannot be overestimated in the light of the
method of integrating new notes into the file described above and the absence of a systematic order. Yet,
it must be noted that this method is also fraught with certain risks: A note or a (smaller) subject area that
is not linked to the web of references becomes lost irretrievably in the bulk of notes. Here the inherent
momentum of “black holes” applies: parts of the file that are poorly linked with other parts tend to remain
isolated later on and hence fade away. This risk is vividly demonstrated by the fact that some smaller parts
of the collection seemed to be untouched since their compilation.
6
The Keyword Index as the Central Key
Thestructureofthefiledescribedsofarultimatelyprovidesthebackdroptounderstandingthefunctionof
the keyword index. The absence of a fixed system of order and, in consequence, a table of contents turned
the index into the key tool for using the file — how else should one be able to find certain notes again
and thus gain access to the system of references? Not wanting to rely on his one memory or pure chance
Luhmann permanently created a keyword index being able to identify at least one point from which the
respective web of references can be accessed.
Whereas the index to the first collection was still of fairly manageable size with its 1,250 entries, the
continuous updates of the index — as another part of the data base maintenance — to the second col-
lection18 ultimately resulted in 3,200 entries. Contrary to the subject index of a book, the file’s keyword
index makes no claim to providing a complete list of all cards in the collection that refer to a specific term.
Rather, Luhmann typically listed only one to four places where the term could be found in the file, the
idea being that all other relevant entries in the collection could be quickly identified via the internal sys-
tem of references described above. As Luhmann noted,19 this concept goes back to the general structure
14.
Luhmann, 1987, p. 143 (my translation).
15.
It must be noted that Luhmann never created a detailed table of contents for the collections (which is not really surprising:
the compilation of such a survey was just not possible due to the continuous evolution of the collections). A preliminary
subject overview in the context of the aforementioned project of making Luhmann’s work accessible for research comprises
a total of roughly 150 pages.
16.
Luhmann, 1987, p. 143 (my translation of “spinnenartiges System”).
17.
For a network model of this kind, see Duncan Watts, 2004.
18.
The second collection contains four versions of the keyword index: Each time the process of continuously adding onto the
index resulted in its alphabetical order becoming too messy, Luhmann created an entirely new version of the index.
19.
Index card no. 9/8b of the second collection.
https://doi.org/10.6092/issn.1971-8853/8350
58


Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: The Fabrication of Serendipity
Sociologica. V.12 N.1 (2018)
of the brain modeled by W.R. Ashby:20 the capacity of the brain does not derive from a huge number
of point-to-point-accesses but on the relations between the nodes (i.e. notes). Therefore, by contrast, the
large number of words listed in the keyword index indicates that this list itself was at least intended to meet
the standard of (thematic) completeness, i.e. complexity of the index file.
The principles according to which the collections are organized have as a consequence that accessing
the file via the keyword index does not limit the search to that term only. Quite to the contrary, the specific
method of integrating cards and the system of linking ensure that any search soon opens up a vast web of
notes leading away from the original topic to a variety of other subjects that the user initially would not
have associated with the first one. If one follows the web of references in detail that are laid down in the
file, one constantly encounter new paths leading to new subjects: the decision to pursue or ignore them
presupposes that there is a specific research question to be answered within a certain time; otherwise, one
risks getting lost in the depths of the file after entering in by using the keyword index.
7
Summary: The Filing System as a Thinking Tool
It is specifically not (only) the paths that Luhmann tread in his initial readings and note-taking that are
constitutive of his filing system but rather the special filing technique and the (selective) relations estab-
lished between his notes by means of his referencing technique that make it possible to retrieve more in
a later query via the pivotal keyword index than what was intended when the notes were initially taken.
As early as in the 1950s to 1960s, Luhmann simulated a modern computer-based database system by ap-
plying the multiple-storage principle in filing subjects and utilizing his referencing technique, by which
he anticipated what would become the common technology of hyperlinking in the era of the World Wide
Web. The file’s analog design, however, limited the realization of its potential for technical reasons since
it required the more time-consuming process of physically looking up and taking out the respective card
instead of a simple mouse click.
One must also not lose sight of the fact that Luhmann’s filing system also — and above all — served
him as a research or thinking tool. This is not only true in terms of the proposition that the file acted as a
communication partner in the research process21 but also in regard to the fact that in Luhmann’s mind the
process of writing things down enables disciplined thinking in the first place: “Underlying the filing tech-
nique is the experience that without writing, there is no thinking.”22 Accordingly, the file also documents
the evolution of important theoretical constructs in Luhmann’s thinking. It contains not only validated
knowledge but also reflects the thought process, including potential mistakes and blind alleys that were
later revised but not (!) removed from the file as the original cards always remained in the file and perhaps
a new card with revisions was added if needed. In this sense, the file is more than just an analog database
of Luhmann’s theory: it can be seen as — drawing on the words of Erving Goffman23 — the backstage of
his theory and therefore as Niklas Luhmann’s intellectual autobiography.
20.
See Ashby, 1967.
21.
See Luhmann’s (1981) description of his relationship with the card index.
22.
Luhmann, Zettelkasten II, index card no. 9/8g (my translation).
23.
See Goffman, 1959.
https://doi.org/10.6092/issn.1971-8853/8350
59


Niklas Luhmann’s Card Index: The Fabrication of Serendipity
Sociologica. V.12 N.1 (2018)
References
Ashby, R.W. (1967). The Place of the Brain in the Natural World. Currents in Modern Biology, 1, 95–104.
Cevolini, A. (2004). Gelehrsamkeit als Medium des Wissens in der frühen Neuzeit. Soziale Systeme, 10,
233–256.
Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Krajewski, M. (2011). Paper Machines. About Cards & Catalogs, 1548–1929. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT
Press.
Luhmann, N.(1951–1996). Zettelkasten. Bielefeld University: Digital Collections. http://ds.ub.uni-
bielefeld.de/viewer/ppnresolver?id=ZKLuhm
Luhmann, N. (1981). Kommunikation mit Zettelkästen. Ein Erfahrungsbericht. In H. Baier, H.M.
Kepplinger, & K. Reumann (Eds.).
Öffentliche Meinung und sozialer Wandel.
Für Elisabeth
Noelle-Neumann (pp. 222–228). Wiensbaden: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Luhmann, N. (1987). Biographie, Attitüden, Zettelkasten. In N. Luhmann, Archimedes und wir. Inter-
views, edited by D. Baecker & G. Stanitzek (pp. 125–155). Berlin: Merve.
Merton, R.K., & Barber, E.G. (2004). The Travels and Adventures of Serendipity. A Study in Histor-
ical Semantics and the Sociology of Science. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press (Original work
published 1945).
Watts, D. (2004). The “New” Science of Networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 30, 243–270.
https://doi.org/10.6092/issn.1971-8853/8350
60
